


























Assessment Objectives for Certification in Family Medicine




2nd Edition







May 2020
 

© 2020 The College of Family Physicians of Canada

All rights reserved. This material may be reproduced in full for educational, personal, and non-commercial use only, with attribution provided according to the citation information below. For all other uses permission must be acquired from the College of Family Physicians of Canada.

Suggested citation: Crichton T, Schultz K, Lawrence K, Donoff M, Laughlin T, Brailovsky C, Bethune C, van der Goes T, Dhillon K, Pélissier-Simard L, Ross S, Hawrylyshyn S, Potter M. Assessment Objectives for Certification in Family Medicine. Mississauga, ON: College of Family Physicians of Canada; 2020

 
Contents

 




Preface to the Second Edition	1
Executive Summary	6

Part I—The evaluation objectives: what are they, where do they come from, and how can they be
used?	8

Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours	30
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features	57

Appendices	172
 
Preface to the Second Edition

 


Similar to the first edition, this second edition of the document formerly titled Defining Competence for the Purposes of Certification by the College of Family Physicians of Canada: Evaluation Objectives in Family Medicine describes the essential skills and observable competencies that are expected from residents at the end of their training, and as such, serves as a major guide to both in-training assessment and the content of the Certification Examination.

The original version of the document1, published in 2010, was envisioned as a living document that would be updated and enhanced to respond to the evolving nature of family medicine practice. The Working Group on the Certification Process2, which evolved into the Certification Process and Assessment Committee (CPAC)3, was tasked with the continuous maintenance of the document.

To minimize disruption on family medicine programs and residents, several updates made over the last five years have been coalesced and are all being released in this new edition.

The following changes and additions were made in this second edition:

1.	Renaming the document Assessment Objectives for Certification in Family Medicine in English (The French name remains unchanged). This change reflects usage in English medical education literature, where training programs are evaluated for their efficacy, but individuals in those programs are assessed for competence.

2.	Six new priority topics. The decision to add these new topics is based on responses to the 2014 validation survey, sent to 2,000 practicing family physicians across the country. Thus, we have grown from 99 to 105 priority topics, which now include: Chronic Pain, Heart Failure, Pain, Rash, Renal Failure, and Shortness of Breath.

3.	Updated key features for 16 existing mental health related priority topics based on work completed by the Working Group on the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health4. Priority Topic name Substance Abuse was changed to Substance Use and Addiction, following a change in terminology.
4.	Changed French translation for 8 priority topic names, based on changes in terminology and/or updates to their key features.

5.	Three supplementary documents are now integrated into the Assessment Objectives document as appendices. These are:

•	Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine 5



1	Defining competence for the purposes of certification by the College of Family Physicians of Canada: Evaluation Objectives in Family Medicine: College of Family Physicians of Canada; 2010

2	Authors of the original 2010 document: Tim Allen, MD; Cheri Bethune, MD; Carlos Brailovsky, MD; Tom Crichton, MD; Michel Donoff, MD; Tom Laughlin, MD; Kathrine Lawrence, MD; Stephen Wetmore, MD
3	CPAC members who contributed to the updated version: Cheri Bethune, MD; Carlos Brailovsky, MD; Tom Crichton, MD; Kiran Dhillon, MD; Michel Donoff, MD; Theresa van der Goes, MD; Steven Hawrylyshyn, MD; Tom Laughlin, MD; Kathrine Lawrence, MD; Luce Pelissier-Simard, MD; Martin Potter, MD; Shelley Ross, PhD; Karen Schultz, MD
4	Working Group on the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health: Ellen Anderson, MD; Marie Hayes, MD; Garey Mazowita, MD; Peter Selby, MD; Vicky Winterton, MD
5	Working Group on the Assessment of Competence in Rural and Remote Family Medicine: Elaine Blau, MD; Garth Campbell, MD; Claudette Chase, MD; Paul Dhillon, MD; Brian Geller, MD; Fred Janke, MD; C. Stuart Johnston, MD; Mohamed Ravalia, MD; Hélène Rousseau, MD

2020	P a g e | 1
 
Preface


•	Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care 6

•	Priority Topics and Key Features for Mental Health (other than those that overlap with the existing priority topics for family medicine)

These supplementary documents are available to be used as resources that can guide in-training assessment and design of learning opportunities for residents in family medicine residency programs.

A conscious choice has been made to keep the overall structure and purpose of this second edition the same as the first edition. We did not change Part I and Part II of the first edition. There are language choices from the first edition left unchanged for clarity purposes – for example the term “evaluation objectives” in Part I and Part
II.	We are aware that the whole document needs to be reviewed and its terminology revised and updated. The review will happen over time, but changes will only be made in five to seven-year cycles to minimize training program impacts and program resource implications.

As with the first edition, this second edition provides an extensive list of competencies in family medicine, extending far beyond the mere listing of important medical knowledge. We urge all readers to read (or re-read) and focus on Part 1, as its framing of what is important to assess, especially the overarching Skill Dimensions of Competence, remains crucial and relevant to the assessment of future family physicians today (namely, Clinical Reasoning, Selectivity, Patient-Centred Approach, Communication, Professionalism and Procedures).

We continue to describe competencies in terms of their most salient key features and observable behaviours. We emphasize that each competency is specific to the situation’s context and to the phases of the clinical encounter; furthermore, each competency is linked back to the appropriate skill dimensions reinforcing this essential relationship.

The CFPC’s 2018 Standards of Accreditation for Residency Programs in Family Medicine 7 indicate that the goal of training is to produce a candidate who is competent to enter and adapt to the independent (i.e., unsupervised) practice of comprehensive family medicine 8 anywhere in Canada.

Through continuous observational sampling, utilising the key features and reflection on a resident’s behaviours and performances, assessors need to be eventually satisfied that a resident displays competency in all six essential skill dimensions of family medicine. Besides in-training assessment, the College of Family Physicians of Canada will continue to use the document as a foundation for examination content.

Awarding Certification in the College of Family Physicians (CCFP) is the responsibility of the CFPC’s Board of Examinations and Certification. This decision is the end result of three discrete, but linked, decisions. The first is a candidate’s qualifying to sit the examination, either through the decision by a training program to recommend a resident as ready to sit the Certification Examination, or by meeting the requirements of the Practice Eligible Route. The second is obtaining a pass on the Certification Examination in Family Medicine. The third is successfully completing all post-examination requirements, either the requirements of their




6	Working Group on the Assessment of Competence in Maternity and Newborn Care: Anne Biringer, MD; William Ehman, MD; Shanna Fenton, MD; Lisa Graves, MD; Andrée Gagnon, MD; Kathrine J. Miller, MD; Sharon Northorp, MD

7	Standards of Accreditation for Residency Programs in Family Medicine. Mississauga, ON: College of Family Physicians of Canada; 2018
8	Comprehensive family medicine as defined by the Family Medicine Professional Profile, Mississauga, Ontario: College of Family Physicians of Canada; 2018
 
2020	2 | P a g e
 
Preface


residency-training program or any practice eligible requirements set by the CFPC, within the Board of Examinations and Certification’s prescribed timelines.

For further details about competence-based assessment and its components, please refer to the College’s 2018 Continuous Reflective Assessment for Training (CRAFT) document9.























































9	Continuous Reflective Assessment for Training (CRAFT): A national programmatic assessment model for family medicine. Mississauga, ON: College of Family Physicians of Canada; 2018
 

2020	3 | P a g e
 
Preface


Priority Topics



New priority topics have been bolded and the ones with updated key features are marked by an asterisk. Topics with an updated translation into French are marked by (F).

1.	Abdominal Pain	39.	Fatigue
2.	Advanced Cardiac Life Support	40.	Fever
3.	Allergy	41.	Fractures
4.	Anemia	42.	Gastro-intestinal Bleed
5.	Antibiotics	43.	Gender Specific Issues (F)
6.	Anxiety*	44.	Grief*
7.	Asthma	45.	Headache
8.	Atrial Fibrillation	46.	Heart Failure
9.	Bad News	47.	Hepatitis
10.	Behavioural Problems* (F)	48.	Hyperlipidemia (F)
11.	Breast Lump	49.	Hypertension
12.	Cancer	50.	Immigrants
13.	Chest Pain	51.	Immunization
14.	Chronic Disease	52.	In Children
15.	Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease	53.	Infections
16.	Chronic Pain	54.	Infertility
17.	Contraception	55.	Insomnia*
18.	Cough	56.	Ischemic Heart Disease
19.	Counselling* (F)	57.	Joint Disorder
20.	Crisis*	58.	Lacerations
21.	Croup (F)	59.	Learning (Patients/Self) (F)
22.	Deep Venous Thrombosis	60.	Lifestyle
23.	Dehydration	61.	Loss of Consciousness
24.	Dementia*	62.	Loss of Weight
25.	Depression*	63.	Low-back Pain
26.	Diabetes	64.	Meningitis
27.	Diarrhea	65.	Menopause
28.	Difficult Patient	66.	Mental Competency* (F)
29.	Disability	67.	Multiple Medical Problems
30.	Dizziness	68.	Neck Pain
31.	Domestic Violence	69.	Newborn
32.	Dyspepsia	70.	Obesity
33.	Dysuria	71.	Osteoporosis
34.	Earache	72.	Pain
35.	Eating Disorders*	73.	Palliative Care
36.	Elderly	74.	Parkinsonism
37.	Epistaxis	75.	Periodic Health Assessment/Screening
38.	Family Issues	76.	Personality Disorder*
2020			4 | P a g e
 

			Preface
77.	Pneumonia	92.	Somatization*
78.	Poisoning	93.	Stress
79.	Pregnancy	94.	Stroke
80.	Prostate	95.	Substance Use and Addiction*
81.	Rape/Sexual Assault	96.	Suicide*
82.	Rash	97.	Thyroid
83.	Red Eye	98.	Trauma
84.	Renal Failure	99.	Travel Medicine
85.	Schizophrenia*	100. Upper Respiratory Tract Infection
86.	Seizures	101. Urinary Tract Infection
87.	Sex* (F)	102. Vaginal Bleeding
88.	Sexually Transmitted Infections	103. Vaginitis
89.	Shortness of Breath	104. Violent/Aggressive Patient
90.	Skin Disorder	105. Well-baby Care

91.	Smoking Cessation
 











































2020	5 | P a g e
 
Executive Summary


Executive Summary


The Domain of Competence in Family Medicine

There are four major components in this definition:

1.	Skill Dimensions of Competence

2.	Phase of the Clinical Encounter

3.	Priority Topics, Core Procedures, and Themes

4.	Key Features and Observable Behaviours

Together they constitute the domain of competence in family medicine. Overall competence is determined through a process of continuous sampling, observation, and reflection of learner performance with respect to key features and observable behaviours for a series of problems (priority topics, procedures, themes), throughout the phases of the clinical encounter, until evaluators are satisfied that the physician is competent in all the skill dimensions.

The Components of the Evaluation Objectives:

1.	Skill Dimensions of Competence: There are six essential skills that enable the family physician to deal competently with problems in the domain of family medicine. The competent family physician has the potential to use all the skills for any problem, but competence is also characterized by adapting the choice of the skills used to the specific needs of the problem at hand.

a)	Patient-centred approach: This is a hallmark of family medicine and represents one of the most efficient and effective methods for dealing with problems. The details of the method are well established in the literature, and the evaluation objectives for this dimension of competence are derived directly from this information.

b)	Communication skills: Certain skills and behaviours facilitate communication, and good communication is essential for competence. Communication can be written or verbal, with patients or colleagues; it also involves listening and watching as much as or more than talking and showing.
c)	Clinical reasoning skills: This dimension focuses on the problem-solving skills used to deal with the “medical aspects” of a problem. Although obviously knowledge dependent, many of the difficulties in this dimension are related to poor process (the how and why). Assessment of these processes is more important than assessing the final results or answers.

d)	Selectivity: This dimension has not, to our knowledge, been described with respect to physician

competence. It describes a set of skills cited as characterizing the competent family physician: such a physician does not do things in a routine fashion, but is selective in their approach, adapting it to the situation and patient. This physician sets priorities and focuses on the most important, knowing when to say something and when not to, gathering the most useful information without losing time on less contributory data, or doing something extra when it will be helpful. It is perhaps a subset of all the other dimensions, but it was used frequently enough to merit its own dimension.

e)	Professionalism: This dimension was the most frequently cited in the descriptions of competence. It includes all the responses that dealt with respect and responsibility to patients, to colleagues, to oneself, to the profession, and to society. It includes ethical issues, as well as lifelong learning and the maintenance of quality of care. It also includes attitudinal aspects such as caring and compassion.

f)	Procedure skills: In the initial survey, specific procedures themselves were not often cited as being characteristic of competence. It was recognized, however, that an individual about to enter independent practice should be able to competently perform certain procedures. A working group on procedure

2020	6 | P a g e
 
Executive Summary


skills identified 65 core procedures; assessment of competence in this dimension will be based on these as well as general key features developed for procedure skills.

2.	Phase of the Clinical Encounter: This component plays an essential role in directing assessment toward the cognitive processes most critical to the competent resolution of a specific problem or situation. It covers the steps or phases from the beginning to end of a clinical encounter. It includes the processes usually identified with a hypothetico-deductive model of clinical problem solving, and with clinical decision making.

a)	Hypothesis generation (preliminary differential diagnosis)

b)	History (gather the appropriate information)

c)	Physical examination (gather the appropriate information)

d)	Investigation (gather the appropriate information)

e)	Diagnosis, including problem identification (interpret information)

f)	Treatment (or management)

g)	Follow-up

h)	Referral

3.	Priority Topics, Core Procedures, and Themes: These constitute a list of the problems or situations that the competent family physician should be able to deal with at the start of independent practice. This list sets out and limits the content of competence in family medicine for the purposes of certification. The limits permit all concerned to concentrate their efforts, and the scope reassures us that overall competence can be reasonably inferred if assessment has been based on an adequate sampling of this content.

a)	Priority topics: This list was generated from the responses in the original survey. It includes diagnoses,

symptoms, presentations, and tasks; there are also roles (periodic health/screening), groups (immigrants, newborn, elderly), issues (lifestyle), situations (family issues, difficult patients), and even some topics (antibiotics).

b)	Core procedures: Competence in this dimension is not limited to the technical skills required for the 65 core procedures. Other aspects, such as indications and contraindications, deciding to do or not to do a procedure, and choosing among several possible approaches should also be assessed. With this in mind, a key feature analysis was undertaken to identify the critical aspects of competence applicable to all procedures.

c)	Themes: The dimensions of the patient-centred approach, professionalism, and communication skills were not sufficiently defined by the key feature analysis of the priority topics. An additional iterative, a focus-group approach, using information from a variety of sources as inspiration, was used to develop a series of themes to organize the description of competence for each of these three dimensions.

4.	Key Features and Observable Behaviours: These are the operational evaluation objectives describing competence in relatively objective and observable terms. This component is most useful for the assessment of competence during daily clinical supervision.
a)	Key features: Each priority topic underwent analysis to generate the key features for the topic. Key features are the specific situations most determinant of competence within a topic and the critical processes involved in dealing competently with each situation. They are determined by a group of practicing peers using a reflective, iterative process. Each key feature identifies the skill dimensions and phases of the clinical encounter that are to be used in assessing the competence for the situation and task in question.

b)	Observable behaviours: For each of the themes identified for communication skills and professionalism, an iterative process analogous to the key feature analysis was used to identify behaviours indicative of competence, or lack of it, for each theme. While the key feature analysis identifies a subset of situations thought to be indicative of overall competence for a topic, the observable behaviour analysis lists all behaviours potentially indicative of competence, and no particular subset is identified as being most critical to competence for the theme or the dimension in question.

2020	7 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


Part I—The evaluation10 objectives: what are they, where do they come from, and how can they be used?










Introduction	9
I.	An overview of the structure and the components of this definition of competence	9

II.	Some theoretical and further practical considerations in defining competence and in designing

successful evaluations	12

III.	Further details on the nature of the evaluation objectives, and how they were derived	15
IV.	Using the evaluation objectives	27




































10 For consistency purposes, we have decided to keep the terminology used in the first edition
 

2020	8 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


Introduction

The purpose of Part I is to encourage and to help you to use the new evaluation objectives to inspire and structure your assessment of competence in family medicine, whether this be assessment of others, or of yourself. This will be done in four steps.

•	First presented is an overview of the structure and components of this definition of competence. This will provide some familiarity with the terms used in the definition, and how the different components may be used to help reach the goal of the assessment or evaluation of competence for the purposes of certification.

•	Second, there is a brief discussion of some of the theoretical and practical considerations in designing successful evaluations. These considerations were kept in mind throughout the development of the evaluation objectives, and are the reason behind most of the choices made and the methods used.

•	Third, we will discuss in more detail what the evaluation objectives are, and how they were derived. Understanding this process and how it relates to the considerations in the previous section are essential if the evaluation objectives are to be used as intended and with maximal usefulness and effectiveness.

•	Finally, a few examples will be given of how these evaluation objectives can be used at this time, followed by some of the additional possibilities for the near future.

Part II presents all of the evaluation objectives in detail. It should be noted that the information that follows is presented in a somewhat heuristic fashion, so much of what may not seem clear as it is being read for the first time should become easier to understand once all the information is obtained and digested. This definition of competence is not linear or hierarchical; the components are, however, complementary. How they fit together and how they work to guide the evaluation of competence will become more evident once the whole picture has been viewed and reflected upon.


I.	An overview of the structure and the components of this definition of competence

There are four major components in this definition, which is specific to family medicine.

1.	The skill dimensions of competence: There are six essential generic skills that enable the family physician to deal competently with problems in the domain of family medicine. The competent family physician has the potential to use all the skills for any problem, but competence is also characterized by adapting the choice of the skills used to the specific needs of the problem at hand. The six skill dimensions are as follows:

a.	The Patient-Centred Approach11


11	We have opted to retain the use of the term “approach” rather than “method”. “Patient-centred approach” includes the “patient-centred method”, but the inverse is not necessarily as clearly true. Making sure our whole

approach to practice is patient-centred is one of the defining characteristics of family medicine, so this term is used when defining competence.
 

2020	9 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


b.	Communication Skills

c.	Clinical Reasoning Skills

d.	Selectivity

e.	Professionalism

f.	Procedure Skills

This component is most useful in summative situations, and assessment of competence in any of the skill dimensions will be based on an adequate series of observations. Overall competence can be inferred when competence has been demonstrated in each of the six skill dimensions, and in the preferential use of the skills most appropriate to a particular problem.

2.	The phase of the clinical encounter dimension of competence: This component is in a slightly secondary position, but plays a critical role in directing assessment toward the cognitive processes that are most critical to the competent resolution of a specific problem or situation. This dimension covers the steps or phases from the beginning to the end of a clinical encounter. It includes the processes usually identified with the hypothetico-deductive model of clinical problem solving, and with clinical decision making. It is most useful for directing and limiting assessment to the processes that are most likely to discriminate between competent and non-competent performances with respect to a specific problem or situation. For this reason it is also particularly useful for orienting additional learning for a trainee who is having recurrent or ongoing difficulty.

3.	The priority topics, the core procedures, and the themes: These three, taken together, constitute a list of the problems or situations that the competent family physician should be able to deal with at the start of independent practice. As such, this component sets out and limits the basic content of the domain of competence in family medicine for the purposes of certification. The domain is, of course, only completely portrayed with the addition of the other three components, as they describe how competence is demonstrated or achieved for each of the problems or situations on these lists. This component is most useful for planning purposes, whether for teaching, learning, or assessment. The limits permit all concerned to concentrate their efforts, and the scope reassures one that overall competence can be reasonably inferred if assessment has been based on an adequate sampling of this content, from all three parts of the list. It also facilitates a periodic review of the domain to see if there are obvious gaps or duplications that may need to be corrected.

4.	The key features and the observable behaviours: These are the operational evaluation objectives, using two different formats, which describe competence in relatively objective and observable terms for each of a series of specific situations that must be dealt with in family medicine. They represent the interactions between all the components for the purposes of assessing competence. There are approximately 1300 distinct elements in this component. This is the component that is most useful for the assessment of competence in specific situations, during daily clinical supervision.

In summary, this definition of overall competence in family medicine provides very problem-specific definitions of competence for a series of situations that must be dealt with by family physicians. These definitions are found
 


2020	10 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


in the fourth component, the key features and the observable behaviours, which constitute the individual and specific evaluation objectives for certification in family medicine.

The other components provide both the framework and the details necessary to make the evaluation objectives operational and effective. Each objective includes, either implicitly or explicitly, the skills and the phases necessary for competent resolution. Each objective is also part of a more general topic or procedure or theme. The degree of detail of description is quite variable, but it is sufficient to direct the evaluation of performance for the situation in question, and to make sure that the performances and processes assessed are truly reflective of competence.

The evaluation objectives, using the term more generally, are described and defined by all four components of this definition of competence. The evaluation objectives and the definition of competence are, for most intents and purposes, the same thing.

Determining competence using the evaluation objectives:

It is perhaps important to emphasize at this time that this whole definition of competence was developed without any reference to assessment tools or examination formats. This was done in order to have a definition of competence and evaluation objectives that are free of the unfortunate biases that are often imposed by predetermined instruments and formats.

We can, however, present both schematic and verbal representations of how this model could be used to determine competence.

Observed in		Skill dimensions	Phases	Competent Physician	
practice					
					
a)		b)	c)		
					
Key features	•	Patient-centred	Exhibited	Continuous sampling, observation,	
and		approach	throughout the	and reflection based on (a), until	
	•	Communication skills	phases of the	this assures and satisfies the	
observable					
	•	Clinical reasoning	clinical	evaluators that the physician is	
behaviours			encounter	competent in all the skills in (b)	
		skills			
					
	•	Selectivity			
	•	Professionalism			
	•	Procedure skills			
					
		d) Priority topics,	core procedures, themes	


This can also be expressed verbally:

“The evaluation objectives provide an extensive list of competencies in family medicine, in terms of key features and observable behaviours. Each of the competencies is specific to the situation to be dealt with and to the phases of the clinical encounter that are involved; each competence is linked to the six skill dimensions that are essential to overall competence in family medicine.
 



2020	11 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


Competence will be determined by continuous sampling, observation, and reflection on an individual’s performances with respect to the key features and the observable behaviours until the evaluator(s) is (are) assured and satisfied that the individual is competent in all six of the skill dimensions essential to competence in family medicine.”

The exact assessment tools and examination formats can be developed later.


II.	Some theoretical and further practical considerations in defining competence and in designing successful evaluations

Two concepts are briefly discussed in this section: the characteristics of successful evaluations; levels of competence from a cognitive point of view, and the greater usefulness of the higher levels in predicting overall competence. These two concepts were used as guiding principles during the development of the evaluation objectives; understanding them will help one to understand the structure of the evaluation objectives, and will improve the chances of their being used appropriately, to full advantage.

Characteristics of successful evaluations:

Any high-stakes evaluation (such as our certification process in family medicine) should strive to perform well on five characteristics.12 It should be

1. Valid:	It should assess performances that are truly indicative of competence in the domain of

tasks for the discipline in question.

2.	Reliable:The evaluation must measure performance in a consistent fashion, and distinguish between competent and non-competent performances.

3.	Cost-effective:  This quality is important in terms of time, effort, and resources.

4.	Acceptable:Both candidates and evaluators must feel that the evaluation is pertinent, rigorous, and fair.

5.	Positive in its effect on learning: It should drive learning toward true competence rather than toward simply passing an examination.

The specific purpose of evaluation objectives is to provide clear direction for the development and use of assessment or evaluation tools or situations, so that these five criteria are met. The evaluation objectives should inform all types of evaluation: formative and summative, structured and unstructured, in-training and terminal, written and oral, and simulated and real-life clinical situations, to name but a few.

To succeed, the evaluation objectives should clearly describe the domain of competence to be tested, as well as competent performances for each of the tasks within the domain. As the particular nature of a competently



12	Van der Vleuten CPM. The assessment of professional competence: developments, research and practical implications. Adv Health Sci Educ. 1996;1:41-67.
 

2020	12 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


performed task is somewhat problem specific, good evaluation objectives include a definition at the level of each problem-task interaction.

If a peer group uses a structured and validated approach to develop all of the steps above (problems in the domain, tasks, and problem-task interactions), we can be reasonably sure that an assessment based on this definition will test performances indicative of competence. We can feel comfortable that the test has been valid, and that the successful candidate is competent—in our case, to start an independent family practice. This approach also permits the identification of performances that are likely to discriminate best between competent and non-competent candidates. Testing that concentrates on such discriminators is more efficient and more likely to generate reliable results. Many other practical issues must, of course, be considered to ensure evaluation reliability, but a valid definition of the competence to be tested is a prerequisite. The more its details outline the elements of competent performances, the easier the development of reliable test instruments and specific test items. This model therefore also tends to improve cost-effectiveness.

Acceptability is a complex issue, but for most of the players (the teachers, learners, and candidates) it has little to do with psychometric qualities of an evaluation program. An evaluation of very high quality can be unacceptable if it doesn’t look or feel right, if it is perceived as being too hard or too easy, or if it is perceived as being not useful for daily activities of practice, clinical teaching, and learning. Evaluation is acceptable if it fits into these daily activities, and if the process and the results of the evaluations are helpful to all the players in achieving their educational goals. Evaluation for certification must also, of course, be of high psychometric quality, but this is not sufficient if it is not first acceptable on the basis of how it looks and feels, how it fits in, and how it is useful.

The effect of evaluation on learning is closely related to acceptability, but merits a few specific comments. The perverse effects of preparing for examinations are well known to postgraduate training programs: the trainees are essentially lost for extensive periods to activities dedicated to preparing to pass examinations. These activities usually concentrate on content and behaviours that have little if anything to do with real competence. Indeed, many might say that they actually reduce competence, devaluing the skills and behaviours that are associated with competence, as these “are not on the exam”. The undeniable value and force of examinations in driving learning cannot be ignored, and were recognized throughout this project: the challenge was to express the evaluation objectives (and, hopefully, the examinations that are based on them) in terms that bring the preparation for examinations as close as possible to a preparation for true competence in family medicine.



Level of competence:

The second concept to be discussed is the difference between low and high levels of competence as far as cognitive skills are concerned, and the reasons why higher levels of competence may be more robust and efficient as indicators of overall competence, as well as being particularly pertinent to family medicine. This will also allow us to look at the difference between “performance” and “competence” and explain some of the preoccupations of the working group members as they developed this definition of competence in family medicine.
 




2020	13 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


Evaluators really need to know what steps were taken, and why, in order to truly appreciate whether an operator acted in a competent manner while performing a task—the end result does not tell the whole story. It is difficult to assess competence without observing some performance, but the difference between the two terms is important. This difference between “competence” and “performance” is nicely illustrated by language-speaking skills. With respect to language, competence can be said to “refer specifically to the speaker’s knowledge of a system of rules that they have assimilated in one way or another. These rules allow them to be creative and produce an unlimited number of grammatically correct phrases. In addition it allows the speaker to determine whether a phrase is grammatically correct or not.”13 Performance does not necessarily require an intimate knowledge of the preceding—many people speak a language very well without being at all aware of the rules and the system. If we wish to truly assess competence, then we should also look at the systems and rules being used during the performance of a task.

This is also important when considering the levels of competence to be assessed. In any profession, many daily activities are routine and do not require a high level of competence. These might even be considered to be routine performances, done without much thought or reflection, where the outcome depends little on the competence of the operator. They are routine problems with clear-cut solutions. Many argue that professional competence is more than this: it is the ability to manage ambiguous problems, tolerate uncertainty, and make decisions with limited information. True competence is manifested in unfamiliar situations, and has been defined as “the capacity to demonstrate cognitive flexibility and adaptability when faced with novel situations in

a	given domain, rather than a ritualized set of responses to a predictable set of stimuli”.14 Medical diagnostic problems can be characterized as usually ill structured: not all the relevant information is available to the problem solver, the potential causes are numerous, and there is often not a definite solution. Solving these problems requires deliberate reasoning, not reflex reaction or simple recognition, which has been called “low-road transfer”. Deliberate reasoning involves the conscious abstraction from one context to another, or the “high-road transfer”15 of knowledge and skills. The highly competent individual is able to generalize abstracted knowledge across a wide range of situations—in essence, attaining competence involves a maximization of high-road transfer. Low-level competence is extremely task-specific, and competence on one task does not at all predict competence on other tasks. Higher-level competence is much more generalizable from one task to another; this is perhaps not surprising as the skills themselves are not very task-specific. Finally, competence at the higher levels usually predicts competence (or clear awareness of the lack of competence) with respect to lower-level skills; the contrary is not at all true.

It is worthwhile noting at this time that the family physician must be competent to deal with many well-defined problems, but he or she must also be especially competent at dealing with the many problems that are undifferentiated, where diagnoses may remain uncertain for extended periods of time, and where multiple other factors (e.g., other illnesses, psychosocial elements, preferences, resources) come into play and must be considered. The skills required to handle these situations correspond very closely to the above definition of the higher-level cognitive skills of true competence.




13	James L. Prolegomena to a theory of communicative competence. Champaign, IL: Center for Comparative Psycholinguistics, University of Illinois; 1969/2003.
14	Regehr G. Chickens and children do not an expert make. Acad Med. 1994;69(12):970-1.
15	Patel V, Kaufman D. On poultry expertise, precocious kids, and diagnostic reasoning. Acad Med. 1994;69(12):971-2.
 

2020	14 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


The implications of the above for a definition of competence for evaluation purposes are three: 1) the definition must include, either implicitly or explicitly, the how’s and the why’s of a competent performance of a task, not just the performance itself; 2) tasks requiring use of the higher levels of competence will permit us to make inferences about overall competence that are much more plausible than tasks requiring only the lower levels; 3) the higher levels of competence are particularly applicable and necessary for competence in family medicine. The working group maintained a healthy preoccupation with these three implications throughout. The key feature approach led naturally in this direction, requiring some definition of the how’s and why’s, and selecting tasks requiring the higher levels of competence, as these are often the ones that are most determinant of competence when handling a particular problem. The preoccupation was equally maintained when using approaches other than the key feature analysis.


III.	Further details on the nature of the evaluation objectives, and how they were derived

This section starts with a brief description of the rationale for the revision of the evaluation objectives for certification, and of the methods used. Additional details on the four major components of the evaluation objectives will follow.


Revising the evaluation objectives:16

In 1998 the Board of Examiners17 of the College decided to review the processes leading to certification. A critical part of this process is the determination of competence at a level appropriate to the start of independent practice as a family physician, so the assessment of this competence also came under review. The essential first step in planning an assessment of competence is to define in sufficient detail that which constitutes the competence in question. Surprisingly, perhaps, existing definitions for family medicine were found not to be detailed enough for the purposes required. For example, the Four Principles of Family Medicine are useful as an overview, providing general goals and guideposts, but they are nowhere near detailed enough to provide clear direction for determining competence. This remained true even though a layer of precision had been added under each principle.

The Board, therefore, decided to go back to the beginning and develop a competency-based definition for the purposes of assessment for certification. It was decided to ground this definition in the experience of practicing family physicians. The opinions of these physicians were sought through a postal questionnaire asking four open-ended questions about how they would define competence in family medicine at the start of independent practice. The results of this survey were analyzed by a focus group, which identified a series of headings that could be used to describe competence. Reanalysis of the survey results according to these headings showed that competence was described in terms of five skill dimensions, the phases of the clinical encounter, and a certain number of priority topics. A sixth skill dimension, procedure skills, was subsequently added, for reasons explained in the next section.


16	This is only a very brief summary of the methodology used and of the results. Complete details have been presented in a series of reports to the College, and will also become available in a series of scholarly articles currently in preparation.

17	Renamed to the Board of Examinations and Certification in 2019
 

2020	15 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


These three components provided a clearer portrait of competence in family medicine, but it was still not detailed enough to provide adequate direction for the assessment of competence. The Board therefore charged other working groups to develop the detailed evaluation objectives using an appropriate combination of these components. A focus-group analysis approach was used, developing the evaluation objectives through multiple structured iterations, and two general formats were used for the final specific and operational evaluation objectives: key features and observable behaviours. These two together are the operational component or layer of the evaluation objectives: they direct how assessment of competence should be done in each situation under consideration.

The individual evaluation objectives themselves can be found elsewhere in this document under the appropriate headings. The next part of this section will, however, provide you with sufficient detail to understand what you should be looking for and how this will all fit together. There is obviously overlap between these various components—indeed a large part of competence is using them in the appropriate integrated fashion. From the pragmatic point of view it is most useful to separate them—this is essential for assessment, and quite likely preferable for teaching and learning at most stages of training.

Further details on the components of the evaluation objectives:

We will maintain the previous order of the components for the first parts of this section, but then discuss in detail the key features before coming back to the core procedures, themes, and observable behaviours. This follows more closely the order in which the components were developed, but, more important, the results of the key feature analysis had a major influence on subsequent steps. A full understanding of the key features makes it easier to understand why the core procedures, themes, and observable behaviours were developed as they were.

1.	The skill dimensions of competence:


General definitions of each of the six skills are presented here. The operational definitions for assessment of competence in each will be found throughout the topics, core procedures, themes, key features, and observable behaviours.

a)	The patient-centred approach: This well-known approach is a hallmark of family medicine and represents one of the most efficient and effective methods for dealing with problems. It does this by concentrating on the patient and his or her context rather than on the disease alone. In this way a shared understanding and common ground can be reached between the patient and the practitioner concerning goals for dealing with the problems at hand. This approach also helps these goals to be realistic and achievable. The details of the method are well established in the literature, and the evaluation objectives for this dimension of competence are derived directly from this information.

b)	Communication skills: Certain skills and behaviours facilitate communication, and good communication is essential for competence. It is a complex skill that permeates most of our other activities. Good communication facilitates the use of the other skills when dealing with problems and improves chances of a successful resolution, whereas poor communication is likely to be very detrimental.
 


2020	16 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


Communication can be written or verbal, with patients or colleagues; it also involves listening and watching as much as or more than talking and showing. All of these aspects need to be assessed.

c)	Clinical reasoning skills: This dimension deals with more familiar territory, and concerns the problem-solving skills used to deal with the so-called “medical aspects” of a problem. Although obviously knowledge dependent, knowledge alone is not sufficient. Many of the difficulties in this dimension are related to poor process, and not to knowledge deficiency. These difficulties in process have the most impact on competence, so assessment of the processes (how and why clinical reasoning is going on) is more important than assessing the final results or answers.

d)	Selectivity: This dimension has not, to our knowledge, been previously described with respect to

physician competence, although it is surely not an original idea. It is the term that was chosen to describe a set of skills that was frequently cited in the survey as characterizing the competent family physician: such a physician does not do things in a routine or stereotypical fashion, but is very selective in approach, adapting it to the situation and the patient. Competent physicians set priorities and focus on the most important; they know when to say something and when not to; they gather the most useful information without losing time on less contributory data, or they do something extra when it will likely be helpful. It is perhaps a subset of all the other dimensions, but it was used frequently enough in the descriptions of competence to merit its own dimension. As we saw earlier, selectivity is found at the higher levels of competence, and it could be an extremely robust indicator of overall competence when used for assessment purposes.

e)	Professionalism: Acting professionally is a complex multi-faceted skill that has little effect by itself,18 but is an absolutely necessary complementary skill for competent practice. It facilitates the use of the other skills when dealing with problems and improves chances of a successful resolution, whereas acting unprofessionally is usually extremely detrimental, even when other skills are good. This dimension was the most frequently cited in the descriptions of competence: it includes all the responses that dealt with respect and responsibility to patients, to colleagues, to oneself, to the profession, and to society at large; it includes ethical issues, as well as most of the issues pertaining to lifelong learning and the maintenance of the quality of care; it also includes important attitudinal aspects such as caring and compassion.

f)	Procedure skills: In the initial survey, skills around specific procedures and other psychomotor skills themselves were not often cited as being characteristic of competence. This was not surprising because the competence we are interested in is more a question of individuals knowing what procedures they are or are not competent to do, and respecting these limits, rather than being able to perform an infinite and unspecified list of procedures. On the other hand, certification does imply that the certificant is competent to perform a certain number of procedures, at the start of independent practice. For these reasons, procedure skills were added as the sixth skill dimension, and measures were taken to define this dimension for the purposes of assessment.






18	When everything else seems to be failing, however, acting professionally (in the widest sense, as used here) is perhaps the greatest indicator of competence, and represents the most useful thing we can be or do.
 

2020	17 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


2.	The phase of the clinical encounter:


Competence was also commonly described in terms of the phase of the clinical encounter without referring to a specific problem, e.g., “take a focused history, generate a good differential diagnosis, refer when indicated”. All of the survey responses of this nature were grouped together in this single dimension, using the following eight subheadings, or phases.

i.	Hypothesis generation (or early differential diagnosis)

ii.	History (gather the appropriate information)

iii.	Physical examination (gather the appropriate information)

iv.	Investigation (gather the appropriate information)

v.	Diagnosis (interpret information) (The term “diagnosis” is used in the general sense, and so includes problem identification.)

vi.	Treatment (or management)

vii.	Follow-up

viii.	Referral

The subheadings were chosen to start to define the principal activity in each phase. The clarifications in parentheses after the subheadings are to remind us that the processes involved are quite different from a cognitive point of view: interpreting a history is quite different from gathering it, and the implications are very different for the assessment of competence. Although these subheadings are similar to those found in clinical reasoning skills, they do in fact mainly refer to the phase, and not to the cognitive skill: all of the six skill dimensions could be applicable in any of the eight phases. Having this separate layer of definition helps us to be more precise when planning or doing an assessment of competence. Competent resolution of one problem may require the use of a particular skill in a particular phase of the clinical encounter; the required skill and the pertinent phase may be totally different for another problem.

3.	The priority topics:

These topics are only one part, albeit the major one, of the situations found in our domain of competence in family medicine, for the purposes of assessment of competence for certification; the other two parts are the core procedures and the themes for the observable behaviours. The justification for the latter two became most evident, however, after the development of the key features for the priority topics. For this reason this section will first give some details on the topics and their key features. This information will be helpful in understanding the subsequent presentation of the core procedures, the themes, and the observable behaviours.

The survey: The first question of the survey was “List the most important problems or clinical situations that a newly practicing family physician should be competent to resolve”. The responses were compiled, retaining the terminology and the level of specificity of the answers wherever possible. Reasonable synonyms were identified and converted to a single form, usually selecting the one that was used most often. This resulted in a total of 99 different topics being listed. The frequencies of the responses for each topic were then calculated. The topics and frequencies are presented on page 21 in tabular form.

Two features of this table are worthy of note:

2020	18 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


The table shows a skewed frequency of citation of each topic, with a few topics being cited much more frequently than others. One could probably limit the topics used for assessment to fewer than 99: remember we are mainly interested in the skills used to deal with the problems in each topic, and less interested in the topics themselves. On the other hand, we do need to know that the certificant is competent to deal with a sufficient number of specific problems, as well as having the general skills, so it does not seem unreasonable to use all 99 topics as the domain for assessment. One might also argue that it would be more pertinent to base assessment on topics from the top one-third of the list than on topics from the bottom one-third, as the latter were really not cited very often at all.

The terminology used for the topics is extremely varied: practicing family physicians use an eclectic taxonomy to describe the problems that must be dealt with. There are many diagnoses, symptoms, presentations and tasks; there are also roles (periodic health/screening), groups (immigrants, newborn, elderly), issues (lifestyle), situations (family issues, difficult patients), and even some topics (antibiotics). Most of these terms are, however, quite familiar to most physicians, and will be understood quite readily. There are a few exceptions (e.g., “in child”), but the interpretation given these can be understood by looking at the key features for these topics.
 










































2020	19 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


Frequencies of citation by topic, in the initial survey

TOPICS	rate of		TOPICS	rate of	
	citation			citation	
					
					
Depression	87%		Behavioural problems	10%	
Anxiety	87%		Allergy	10%	
Substance abuse	60%		Multiple medical problems	9%	
Ischemic heart disease	52%		Dizziness	9%	
Diabetes	51%		Counselling	9%	
Hypertension	50%		Earache	9%	
Pregnancy	48%		Grief	8%	
Headache	43%		Thyroid	8%	
Periodic health/screening	42%		Stroke	8%	
Palliative care	40%		Vaginitis	7%	
Family issues	37%		Insomnia	7%	
Abdominal pain	36%		Infections	7%	
Upper respiratory infection	35%		Anemia	6%	
Difficult patient	35%		Immunization	6%	
Domestic violence	33%		Advanced cardiac life support	6%	
Asthma	33%		Gastrointestinal bleeding	5%	
Chest pain	32%		Obesity	5%	
Dementia	32%		Lacerations	5%	
Low-back pain	32%		Eating disorder	5%	
Chronic disease	29%		Antibiotics	5%	
Elderly	29%		Stress	4%	
Contraception	28%		Prostate	4%	
Sex	28%		Fracture	4%	
Menopause	27%		Newborn	4%	
Joint disorder	26%		Immigrant issues	4%	
Sexually transmitted infections	24%		Deep venous thrombosis	4%	
Well-baby care	24%		Hepatitis	3%	
Schizophrenia	23%		Atrial fibrillation	3%	
Skin disorder	23%		Parkinsonism	3%	
Disability	20%		Learning	3%	
Personality disorder	19%		Seizure	3%	
Fatigue	18%		Infertility	3%	
Lifestyle	18%		Loss of weight	2%	
Urinary tract infection	16%		Mental competency	2%	
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease	16%		Osteoporosis	2%	
Trauma	16%		Loss of consciousness	2%	
Cancer	16%		Red eyes	2%	
Vaginal bleeding	15%		Croup	2%	
Fever	15%		Poisoning	2%	
Smoking cessation	15%		Meningitis	2%	
Bad news	14%		Travel medicine	2%	
Violent/aggressive patient	14%		Dehydration	1%	
Suicide	14%		Diarrhea	1%	
Breast lump	14%		Neck pain	1%	
Dyspepsia	13%		Crisis	1%	
Hyperlipidemia	13%		Dysuria	1%	
Pneumonia	13%		Rape/sexual assault	1%	
In child	13%		Gender-specific issues	1%	
Cough	12%		Epistaxis	1%	
Somatization	12%				

Three frequent questions are asked concerning the priority topics, and can be answered here.

1.	Is this list valid? Clearly the answer is yes. A second survey was completed with a different

representative group of family physicians. The correlation was extremely high between both the topics cited and the relative frequencies of citations.

2020	20 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


2.	Should other topics be on the list? It is much more important to exclude topics or material that is not

demonstrably valid from an evaluation than it is to include all possible valid material. The topics currently on the list have been validated, and they do cover a lot of territory. Demonstrable competence in dealing with these topics will let us infer that the candidate is competent to practice all aspects of family medicine, and that is what evaluation and certification need to do. There is no need to add further topics, although a mechanism should be established to regularly review the list in a structured and valid fashion.

3. Aren’t these topics a bit too broad to direct the design of evaluations? This is a correct observation. Evaluation objectives that stop at this level (as many do) are not detailed enough to help us reach the five goals for successful evaluation, as stated earlier. In dealing with these topics in the specific context of family medicine, we need to identify the critical elements, the higher levels of competence, and the skills needed to deal with the situations under each topic. This was first done using the key feature analysis, as described both above and below.

4. Key features:

A key feature analysis identifies two things: it first identifies the specific situations that are most determinant of competence within a topic; it then identifies the critical steps and the critical processes involved in dealing competently with each situation. The key feature is the interaction between the problem and the dimensions of competence necessary to deal with it; the key feature also clarifies, either implicitly or explicitly, both how and why things should be done in a competent fashion for this particular problem.

As a rule, key features are observable actions: They are processes or skills, not simple knowledge. In this respect they fit very well with the current trend toward “competency”-based teaching and assessment. Key features are not only problem or situation specific; they are also discipline specific. By developing the key features specific to each topic we can add the problem-task interaction layer to our definition of competence.

Key features are generated according to clinical experience, not theoretical considerations or literature searches. The number of key features will vary greatly from one problem to another. This number is essentially determined by the various elements considered essential to the competent resolution of that clinical problem. They are determined by a group of practicing peers, using a reflective, iterative process. The approach is intentionally selective; it covers only what is distinctive of competence.

How, then, do these characteristics of key features lend themselves particularly well to the task at hand: assessing competence in family medicine? Key features permit this assessment by promoting validity and reliability in testing. They are valid for two main reasons:

•	They are generated by a group of practicing physicians, who base their analysis on the real-life solution of problems in family medicine.

•	They identify the higher levels of competence, and these are the levels that distinguish best between the competent and the not-yet-competent practitioner during the certification process.

Key features help to improve reliability by permitting assessment to be selective, concentrating on skills that are likely to discriminate between candidates, and by identifying criteria that can be used to assess performances

2020	21 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


objectively in test situations. The key features are not themselves test items, but they are signposts that clearly suggest both the content and the format of the test items that would be most appropriate.

In short, key features permit assessment to be concentrated on skills that discriminate between competent and not-yet-competent physicians in a fair, valid, and objective fashion. Experience elsewhere has shown that reliable results can be achieved in a relatively short testing time when test construction is based on key features. Key features are also quite intuitive (although the process of developing them is much less so); for this reason, evaluations based on key features are usually well accepted by all concerned as valid or authentic. In addition, because they reflect the performances related to true competence, key feature-based evaluations tend to stimulate appropriate learning.

The key features for the priority topics: As stated in the initial section of this report, a key feature specifies a particular clinical or situational starting point within a topic, and then identifies a task or action to be done that is critical to the competent resolution of the problem at hand. It specifies, implicitly or explicitly, the skill and the phase dimensions that are involved. It is important to emphasize that as a key feature is being developed there is no preconceived determination of the skills or phases to be included—these are determined by the problem itself, and by the processes required for its competent resolution. Each key feature is therefore a mini-competence, specific to the problem in question, and contains sufficient detail to be used as an evaluation objective that will clearly direct assessment in the intended direction. All the key features, by topic, are listed in Part II.

An assessment based on all the key features for one topic should determine whether competence has been reached for that topic; an assessment based on the key features of all the priority topics should determine whether competence has been achieved for this definition of the domain of competence of family medicine. It is important to know, therefore, whether such an assessment would adequately cover all the dimensions (skills and phases) of competence that we have previously identified as essential. To this end, the last step in the development of every key feature was to code it for the skill and phase dimensions that it assessed, permitting a maximum of two skills and two phases per key feature. These codes are not yet visibly attached to their key features in this current posting, although they are available in working files. The overall compilation is available, however, for all the key features of all 99 priority topics, and is given in the following table.
 





















2020	22 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


Descriptive coding of the key features:

A	total of 773 key features were generated for the 99 topics, for an average of 7.8 key features per topic. The implications of the relative frequencies in the boxes are discussed below.

Skill dimensions	% of key		Phase dimension	% of key			
	features			features			
Patient-centred approach	14%		Hypothesis generation (= early DDx)	22%	Gather		
Communication skills	4%		History	14%	=	Diagnose	
Clinical reasoning skills	60%		Physical	4%	47%	=	
Selectivity	16%		Investigation	7%		63%	
Professionalism	5%		Diagnosis	16%	Interpret		
			(includes problem identification)		= 16%		
							
Psychomotor	1%		Treatment	30%	Manage	Manage	
			Follow-up	5%	=	=	
			Referral	2%	37%	37%	
1080 codes for 773 key features = 1.4		1128 codes for 773 key features = 1.5 codes/key feature		
codes/key feature							

Relative percentages for the skill dimensions: These percentages in no way reflect the relative importance of these dimensions; it simply means that key feature analysis of the priority topics identifies many opportunities to assess three of the skill dimensions, but few opportunities for three others, namely communication skills, professionalism, and procedure skills. We must define these latter three by a complementary process and plan their assessment by parallel means.

As already mentioned, a core procedures list (analogous to the priority topics list) was developed, and the general key features for procedure skills were developed. The latter can be used to guide the assessment of competence for the individual procedures. Both the list of core procedures and their general key features are found later in this document.

For professionalism and communication skills, the definitions were completed using our “observable behaviour” approach. The method was briefly introduced earlier in this report, and is expanded upon below under “The themes and observable behaviours”.

One other important point is not evident in this table—even though ample opportunity is provided for the assessment of the patient-centred method, the key features do not provide much specific direction as to how to assess or judge this competence objectively. For this reason we also generated some observable behaviours to help guide the assessment of this dimension. They were derived directly from the excellent already-published material on this dimension, and they are listed with the other evaluation objectives in Part II. If further detail is
 


2020	23 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


felt to be necessary, this could be generated de novo, but it could also probably be done using the same published material.

Relative percentages for the phase dimension: The three columns show progressive groupings of frequencies in

terms of the different clinical tasks, which do require somewhat different cognitive skills. Once again, all the phases are important to overall competence, but we do interpret these figures to indicate the relative importance of the various cognitive skills in dealing with our priority topics in family medicine, in contradistinction to the skill dimensions. We see that the essential skills for the majority of the key features deal with diagnosis (63%), and that nearly half (47%) deal with the active process of gathering the pertinent data to make an adequate diagnosis. Sixteen percent deal with making a diagnosis given certain data, and slightly more than one-third deal with management. These figures are important for two reasons. First, data-gathering skills in this context represent a higher cognitive level of competence than data-interpretation skills or management choices. Second, traditional evaluations have often concentrated more on management, and have neglected the diagnostic phases as being too difficult to evaluate or too basic to be important. The opposite is actually true. The higher cognitive levels of competence (as represented here by diagnostic skills) are much better predictors of overall competence than are the lower levels, such as management choices, which are usually quite problem specific. While competence obviously requires the demonstrated ability to manage many problems in family medicine, it is much more important for us to concentrate our efforts on the higher levels if we wish our evaluation process to be valid and efficient.

Are we sure that these key features are the right ones? Similar questions can be asked about the validity and inclusiveness of the key features as were asked of the topics: Would other groups of physicians develop different key features, and would the inclusion of others improve the evaluation process?

The answer to the first question is yes, and to the second, no. The key features method has been validated elsewhere, and a validation study of our key features showed that a different group of physicians agreed with over 95% of the key features. This other group did suggest some additional key features, but these usually addressed the same concepts with different examples. We therefore are confident that the current key features are more than sufficient, even though they are not absolutely complete. Once again, the establishment of a mechanism for the ongoing review of key features is important, but we do not expect them to change significantly over the short term.

How does one get from key features to evaluations? Key features are the starting point for developing

various evaluation instruments or situations, both formal and informal, which can be used throughout a certification process. Key features serve as reference points and signposts throughout all evaluation activities, as they are a major component of our operational definition of competence. They are one of the “keys” to maintaining validity throughout the certification process.

There remain for presentation the three areas not well defined by the key feature analysis: procedure skills, communication skills, and professionalism.

5. The core procedures and their key features:

Procedure skills are a good example of the different levels of competence. As far as an individual procedure is concerned, cognitive skills are generally low level: the technique is learned and practiced and becomes routine.

2020	24 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


Indications and contraindications, deciding to do or not to do a procedure, and choosing among several possible approaches to a problem are examples of the higher levels of competence. As a general rule, the individual at the higher levels of competence

•	will not perform a procedure at which he or she is not skilled and

•	will arrange to learn a procedure that he or she is going to need in his or her particular practice.

This is surely the most important aspect of competence to assess for certification.

Certification cannot, however, limit itself to this level. An independent practice requires a certain level of experiential competence; the practitioner is assumed to have the technical skills to perform a certain number of procedures. The challenge is to define what these essential, or basic, procedures are. Very few (1%) of the key features for the priority topics involved procedure skills in their resolution. It was therefore decided to use a parallel process to better define competence in this skill dimension.

Another working group assumed this task, surveying a group of practicing family physicians to identify and validate a list of core procedures for the start of an independent practice. This group identified 65 core procedures and 15 enhanced procedures. The 65 core procedures are the procedures upon which the assessment of competence will be based—these procedures are listed in Part II. It must be remembered that not only the technical aspects of individual procedures are important. The higher levels of competence will also be assessed, as always, in the context of family medicine: the details of these were defined by a key feature analysis, and these can also be found with the core procedures in Part II.

6.	The themes and the observable behaviours:

The other two skill dimensions that were not well defined by the key feature analysis of the priority topics are not the least important—indeed the dimensions of professionalism and communication skills are often neglected as far as rigorous assessment is concerned, even though a lack of competence in these dimensions will have negative effects throughout all the other dimensions as well. These dimensions were defined through a focus-group approach, using information from various sources as inspiration, first developing a series of themes under each dimension. This was followed by a multiple-iteration process to identify behaviours that were indicative of competence, or lack of it, under each theme. The process was continued until satisfaction and saturation were achieved. The behaviours had to be observable (= potentially assessable in a fairly objective fashion); hence the term “observable behaviours”.

This process is analogous to the key feature analysis, but differs in two important ways. First, it is dimension based rather than topic based; we started with the dimension, identifying observable behaviours that are indicative of competence (or lack of it) in that dimension in certain situations in family medicine. Second, whereas the key feature analysis identifies a subset of situations and competencies thought to be indicative of overall competence in the topic in question, the observable behaviour analysis does not attempt to do this: all potentially indicative behaviours are listed, both major and minor, and no particular subset has been identified at this time as being most critical to competence. This could well be a useful exercise at a future date.

The themes of the two dimensions are presented here—the observable behaviours themselves are listed in Part II.

2020	25 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


Communication skills:

The themes or skill subsets are as follows. Noteworthy for this dimension is that observable behaviours under each subset were developed twice, once for communication with colleagues, and once for communication with patients. There is considerable overlap, but there are some major differences.

1.	Listening skills

2.	Language skills

i.	Verbal

ii.	Written

iii.	Charting skills

3.	Non-verbal skills

i.	Expressive

ii.	Receptive

4.	Cultural and age appropriateness

5.	Attitudinal

Professionalism:

Knowing how to act professionally and actually doing it in a consistent fashion are not one and the same, and this has major implications for the context of any evaluation. Assessment should probably be based on observations of real-life, real-time behaviours—it does not really lend itself to assessment in simulated situations. In this dimension, competence was defined as being demonstrated by a series of observable behaviours that have been grouped under 12 themes. The themes are listed below. The observable behaviours are listed in Part II.

1.	Day-to-day behaviour reassures one that the physician is responsible, reliable, and trustworthy.

2.	The physician knows his or her limits of clinical competence and seeks help appropriately.

3.	The physician demonstrates a flexible, open-minded approach that is resourceful and deals with uncertainty.

4.	The physician evokes confidence without arrogance, and does so even when needing to obtain further information or assistance.

5.	The physician demonstrates a caring and compassionate manner.

6.	The physician demonstrates respect for patients in all ways, maintains appropriate boundaries, and is committed to patient well-being. This includes time management, availability, and a willingness to assess performance.

7.	The physician demonstrates respect for colleagues and team members.

8.	Day-to-day behaviour and discussion reassure one that the physician is ethical and honest.

9.	The physician practices evidence-based medicine skillfully. This implies not only critical appraisal and information-management capabilities, but incorporates appropriate learning from colleagues and patients.

10.	The physician displays a commitment to societal and community well-being.


2020	26 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


11.	The physician displays a commitment to personal health and seeks balance between personal life and professional responsibilities.

12.	The physician demonstrates a mindful approach to practice by maintaining composure/equanimity, even in difficult situations, and by engaging in thoughtful dialogue about values and motives.


IV.	Using the evaluation objectives

The main target audience of this section at this time consists of trainees and their preceptors, and the use of the evaluation objectives during training and daily supervision. They are already being used in other contexts, but these are dealt with elsewhere.

The first piece of advice may seem paradoxical, but should improve the chances of getting started and eventually using the evaluation objectives to their full potential:

1)	Do not read the evaluation objectives in any great detail: Both preceptors and trainees should start by getting into the habit of using some type of field note after most supervised clinical encounters to stimulate discussion, identify the critical steps in the resolution (or not) of the situation in question, reflect on the performance with respect to these, and document one or two points that seem to be most useful. Start to concentrate as much or more on the process (why and how) as on the results, paying particular attention to diagnostic reasoning and decision making. Many of these steps are already being done, but often without an awareness of the cognitive processes involved, and without always being able to articulate the judgments, reflection, and feedback that will be most useful in moving toward competence. Such a repetitive analytical approach will gradually become intuitive, for both trainees and preceptors. This would now be the time, if it has not already been done, to get to know the evaluation objectives in detail.

2)	Consult the evaluation objectives to help to articulate the analysis, reflection, and feedback on clinical performances, either by supervision or by self-assessment: Much of the difficulty experienced with in-training evaluations comes from not being able to articulate clearly and objectively why a certain performance does or does not meet the standards of competence, and what might need to be changed to reach competence. The “does not” situation is particularly problematic, as the result is often a vague response from a preceptor, or no comment and no useful documentation at all of a series of subpar performances, with no useful constructive feedback for change. Similarly, the apparently competent performance often deserves a more insightful analysis and feedback, so that any continuing minor weaknesses can be identified and corrected, or if all truly seems well, then future teaching and learning can be concentrated on other areas.

The evaluation objectives provide this articulation for most of the situations that will be met during training in family medicine. They also depersonalize, in a useful way, the judgments and feedback, making them easier to accept by providing clear reference points and justified descriptions of competence in a pragmatic fashion.
 




2020	27 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


3)	Use the evaluation objectives to help to structure, organize, and document progress toward competence: The evaluation objectives provide a frame of reference and clear guideposts for achieving and demonstrating competence in family medicine. They are equally applicable for regular unstructured daily clinical supervision, for planned direct observations, or for any structured assessment activity. They are particularly useful for a trainee in some difficulty—the areas of weakness can be better defined, thus permitting specific educational prescriptions and further assessment in these specific areas as necessary.

Some may prefer more structured field notes, even for the unstructured supervisions. The components of the evaluation objectives may be used to develop these: the skill dimensions, the phase of the clinical encounter, the priority topics, and the procedures. Whatever structure is used, the feedback and documentation should be inspired by the key features or the observable behaviours. It is also important to remember that for most preceptor-trainee clinical interactions, the analysis and feedback should be limited to one or two specific areas or points.

The evaluation objectives are designed for an individual, but can also obviously be used to plan group-learning activities—topics can be reviewed through the key features. Prototypical critical incidents tend to be identified, so they can be discussed ahead of time—wisdom and experience cannot really be taught, but some of the lessons learned can be passed on ahead of time.

Future developments may include topic- and dimension-specific field notes, perhaps computer generated on demand. Electronic filing and compilation would permit ready revision of progress and help with planning of future training. There is perhaps no limit at this time on how the evaluation objectives might be used—it is hoped that experiences and new ideas will be shared, so that all may benefit.

4)	Other uses of the evaluation objectives: The evaluation objectives are already being used to design and develop the certification examinations. They could also be used in several other ways.

Levels of competence, core competence: The expected performances at certain levels of training can be defined using the evaluation objectives. This would be useful for deciding on promotion, equivalence of previous training, needs for additional training, etc.

Curriculum design: Curriculum design is a complex issue, with many limiting factors. The measure of the pertinence of an activity should, however, no longer be its name and its duration. The measure should be the contribution of the activity to the progressive acquisition of competencies, and the degree to which it can demonstrate that it is fulfilling this objective. The evaluation objectives provide a pragmatic reference tool to which a curriculum and its parts may be compared and against which they may be judged. They are structured so that the comparisons should be quite straightforward and the judgments transparent, leading to changes within an existing activity or to a new activity. In this way, they can be used for continuous quality improvement and help to ensure that our curricula in family medicine evolve in a dynamic fashion as we strive to make sure that our training programs promote, in an efficient and predictable manner, the acquisition of all the competencies required of the family physician in today’s society.
 


2020	28 | P a g e
 
Part 1—The evaluation objectives


Defining the specialty of family medicine, with comments on postgraduate and undergraduate training: A medical specialty or discipline is defined by many characteristics, and may include many variants or even subspecialties. There usually is, however, an identifiable central competence common to all these variants and subspecialties within one specialty. This situation applies to family medicine, and the evaluation objectives do represent an operational definition of this central competence, one that should be common to all family physicians. As such they can be used to determine the resources needed to provide the necessary common training and assessment of competence, and to justify these needs to academic institutions, licensing bodies, provincial governments, and society at large. This competency-based definition of family medicine is quite transparent, and the link between the desired result (competent family physicians) and the postgraduate training required (in which clinical milieu, with which kind of preceptors, to what level of desired competence) should be just as transparent. It is also quite detailed and factual or objective, so both inadvertent redundancies and gaps can be identified, and specific limited corrective modifications can be made, without changing the whole curriculum.

This competency-based definition also permits those involved with undergraduate training to look ahead to what competencies are required for family medicine. Curricular modifications at this level may then better prepare students for postgraduate training in family medicine, and they may well be able to justify even more significant curricular changes to achieve objectives that move toward competencies common to more than one specialty. Our evaluation objectives define the nature of competence at the point of entry into independent practice in family medicine. Nothing in our definition states, however, when these competencies must be acquired or in what order. This is more properly the domain of the educators, those who look after the training at all levels, by designing curricula and supervising activities, and by assessing, on a regular basis, progress toward the desired competencies and overall competence. Once again, the evaluation objectives are an essential reference point and a useful tool for achieving this result in family medicine.

End of Part I
 


























2020	29 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours







Introduction	31
The Patient-Centred Approach	32

Communication Skills	34
Professionalism	43

Clinical Reasoning Skills	53
Selectivity	55

Procedure Skills	56
 









































2020	30 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours






Introduction

Part I of the evaluation objectives document provides a fairly detailed description of the processes used for the development of these evaluation objectives, as well as the rationale for the choices made. It can be found on pages 10-30 of this document (see menu).

Part II of the document, which is the subject of the following pages, is the operational level, containing all the details necessary to assess performances in family medicine, to make objective judgments about competence in specific situations, and to stimulate reflection than can lead to interpretive feedback and suggestions for future learning and changes that will help the trainee or the practitioner to move toward competence. These objectives should also help to concentrate efforts on those elements that are most determinant of competence, both in general and with respect to specific situations. In this way, time spent on evaluation will be both more effective and more efficient. Finally, as these objectives are entirely competency based, their use should drive learning toward competency, rather than toward simply passing examinations at various times.

They are organized according to the six essential skill dimensions of competence. The format varies with the dimension, but in each case it should be sufficient to clearly orient evaluation of the dimension in the context of daily clinical practice and supervision. Each dimension could be considered a menu of useful items to be selected according to the specific needs of the situation. As such it is helpful to be familiar with the whole menu before making the selections that fit the needs. The dimensions are followed by the priority topics and key features: they are not cross-referenced at this time, and so searching for the right combinations may require several steps. The next version of these objectives will be cross-referenced and searchable by various parameters.

These objectives do not contain any test instruments or examinations or scoring scales or performance levels or forms, nor any prescription for developing these tools. This omission is intentional, as was explained in Part I of the objectives. As these tools are developed, these evaluation objectives will provide the primary matter that will direct both the content and the format of the instruments used, and increase the chances that any evaluation will do well according to the five parameters associated with successful evaluations.

Could these evaluation objectives be used as a study guide or a curriculum, and should they be? The answer is mixed. As a curriculum, the evaluation objectives are incomplete. They will represent one set of terminal objectives, but a curriculum must also pay attention to the intermediate and enabling objectives necessary to learning, as well as to other possible end points. As a study guide, these evaluation objectives are more usable, as long as the reader remembers that performances will be assessed in the context of all the layers of our definition of competence in family medicine. This means that assessment will concentrate as much on the skills and processes used to deal with problems as it does on the actual answers or solutions to specific problems. With this caveat, it can be said that a physician who can show competence in dealing with an adequate sample of the topics, procedures, and themes on this list, demonstrating the higher levels of competence in each of the six essential skill dimensions, in all phases of the physician-patient encounter, and in the context of the Four Principles of Family Medicine, probably does indeed deserve certification to start independent practice.
 







2020	31 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours






The Patient-Centred Approach


This dimension encompasses the clinical method established by the Centre for Studies in Family Medicine at The University of Western Ontario.

The method sets out to understand a patient’s presenting problem through learning about the disease and how the individual experiences it. One must learn what patients feel in connection to their symptoms, how they explain what they are experiencing, the effect it is having on their lives, and how they hope the physician will be able to help to address the problem.

This is connected to the process of gaining a greater understanding of the whole person— “who the patient is”, his or her “context”. Who the people in their lives are and how they relate to them, who or what their supports are, and what social factors exist all play a role in understanding patients’ context. This context weaves through the patient’s “disease” and how he or she experiences it.

In attempting to address a concern, the patient and the physician work to come to a common understanding of the problem and their roles in addressing it. Understanding a patient and his or her context is also important in effective health promotion and prevention, which are incorporated into this method.

It is a realistic approach and, like care in family medicine, a longitudinal one. The priorities of the patient and physician are respected and balanced. The resources of individuals and the community are considered in the process.

This method is considered an essential tool in building the patient-physician relationship. The working group felt that the details of the method are clearly articulated in Patient-Centered Medicine: Transforming the Clinical Method by Stewart, Brown, Weston, McWhinney, McWilliam, and Freeman. We did not attempt to redefine the method, but have instead tried to express the various components of the method as specific actions that can be observed during the clinical encounter. The patient-centred approach permeates all of our clinical encounters, but there are specific instances in which skill in this dimension may be better assessed. Many examples of these instances can be found within the priority topics and key features.
 


















2020	32 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




Observable Behaviours:

1.	Actively explores patients’ experience with a problem by inquiring about:

•	what they feel in connection with their problem (feelings)

•	how they explain what they are experiencing (ideas)

•	the effect it is having on their life (impact on function)

•	how they hope the physician will be able to help them address the problem (expectations)

2.	In assessing a clinical problem, attempts to gain a greater knowledge and understanding of the whole person by asking about his or her context (i.e., who else is in his or her life [family, partner, children], who or what supports are, other social factors [work, finances, education, etc.])

3.	In moving toward developing a management plan for a patient’s problem, integrates a patient’s context with his or her illness experience in a clear and empathetic way

4.	In attempting to address a problem, works with the patient to come to a shared understanding of it and each person’s role in addressing it by

•	encouraging discussion

•	providing the patient with opportunities to ask questions

•	encouraging feedback

•	seeking clarification and consensus

•	addressing disagreements

5.	In finding common ground around the management of a problem, incorporates relevant health promotion and prevention.

6.	Approaches a patient’s problems with a realistic and longitudinal view, which respects and appropriately balances the priorities of the patient and physician; considers the resources of individuals and the community.
 






















2020	33 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours






Communication Skills


Communication skills were clearly identified as one of the skill dimensions essential for the competent practice of family medicine. There is a large body of literature on communication and the working group did not attempt to redefine communication or develop a theoretical definition. We chose instead to articulate a pragmatic approach focused on skills and behaviours that facilitate communication.

We began by identifying those themes or skill subsets that are essential to good communication. We then used an interactive focus-group approach to define the themes and observable behaviours that should predict competence for entry to the independent practice of family medicine. Other observable behaviours may be added to this list; however, those identified below should be more than sufficient to determine competence.

These are the themes identified:

1.	Listening skills

2.	Language skills

a)	Verbal

b)	Written

c)	Charting skills

3.	Non-verbal skills

a)	Expressive

b)	Receptive

4.	Cultural and age appropriateness

5.	Attitudinal

The working group felt there were tangible differences between communication with health team members and with patients. Physicians may be able to communicate effectively with one group and not with the other; therefore we chose to separate these areas in our definition. For each group we have identified observable behaviours for each type of interaction. Some behaviours appear in both sections. They have been duplicated in order to be comprehensive.

For each subset of skills we have identified behaviours, expressed either positively () or negatively (), that reflect competence. Positive behaviours are listed first, followed by negative behaviours. We have not placed the behaviours in any order of priority. For the most part, only the positive or negative expression of the behaviour was described.
 












2020	34 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




Effective Communication with Patients

1.	Listening Skills

Uses both general and active listening skills to facilitate communication

Observable Behaviours:

	Appropriately looks at the patient while the patient is talking

	Allows the time for appropriate silences

	Feeds back to the patient what he or she has understood from the patient

	Provides appropriate non-verbal responses to patient’s statements

	At all times responds to verbal cues (e.g., does not go on with regular questioning when the patient reveals major life or situation changes like “I just lost my mother”)

	Clarifies jargon when used by the patient

	Comprehends what the patient says

	Lets the patient tell his or her story (does not interrupt the patient inappropriately)

	Does other things while the patient is talking (e.g., looks at computer chart, takes phone calls)

2.	Language Skills

a)	Verbal:

Adequate to be understood by the patient; able to converse at an appropriate level for the patient’s age and educational level; appropriate tone for the situation—to ensure good communication and patient comfort

Observable Behaviours:

	Asks open- and closed-ended questions appropriately

	Checks back with the patient to ensure understanding (e.g., “If I say this, am I understanding you correctly?”)

	Facilitates the patient’s story (e.g., “Can you clarify that for me?”)

	Provides clear and organized information in a way the patient understands (e.g., test results, pathophysiology, side effects) and checks back to ensure the patient understands

	Provides explanations to accompany examinations and/or procedures

	When first meeting a patient, clarifies how the patient would like to be addressed

	Fails to greet the patient

	Interrupts patients inappropriately

	Uses inappropriate word choices for the individual’s level of understanding (e.g., use of scientific language that the patient cannot understand, overuse of jargon)

	Displays inappropriate anger

	Uses inappropriate humour

	Uses paternalistic language (e.g., use of “dear”)

	Uses offensive language (e.g., swearing)

	Shouts or uses excessively loud speech

2020	35 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




	Asks multiple questions without awaiting the answers

	Has language skills that are insufficient to be easily understood by the majority of patients (i.e., patients can’t understand what the physician is saying)

b)	Written:

Clearly articulates and communicates thoughts in a written fashion (e.g., in a letter to a patient, educational materials for the patient, instructions for a patient)

Observable Behaviours:

	Writes legibly

	Written material is organized so the patient can understand (spelling, grammar, and punctuation must be sufficient to permit understanding)

	When providing written information, chooses materials that are appropriate to the patient’s level of understanding

	Uses abbreviations that are not understood by the patient


3.	Non-Verbal Skills

a)	Expressive:

Being conscious of the impact of body language on communication with the patient and adjusting it appropriately when it inhibits communication

Observable Behaviours:

	Sits while interviewing the patient (in order to convey the feeling of providing the patient with more time and attention)

	Eye contact is appropriate for the culture and comfort of the patient

	Is focused on the conversation

	Adjusts demeanour to be appropriate to the patient’s context (e.g., is pleasant, appropriately smiles, is appropriately serious, is attentive, is patient and empathetic)

	Communicates at eye level (e.g., with children, patients who are bedridden)

	Physical contact is appropriate for the patient’s comfort

	Fidgets

	Hygiene or dress that inhibit communication

	Gets too close (not respectful of other’s personal space)

b)	Receptive:

Aware of and responsive to body language, particularly feelings not well expressed in a verbal manner (e.g., dissatisfaction, anger, guilt)

Observable Behaviours:

2020	36 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




	Responds appropriately to the patient’s discomfort ( e.g., gets a tissue for a patient crying, shows appropriate empathy with the patient’s difficulties )

	Verbally checks the significance of body language (e.g., “You seem nervous/upset/uncertain/in pain; is that right?”)

	Comments on behaviour/non-verbal actions of the patient when appropriate (e.g., “You seem quiet/unhappy/angry/worried/in pain”)

	Modifies actions during examination or history-taking in response to the patient’s discomfort (e.g., adjusts angle of exam table when patients are short of breath during an abdominal exam)

	Misses signs that the patient does not understand what is being said (e.g., blank look, look of astonishment, puzzlement)

4.	Culture and Age Appropriateness

Adapts communication to the individual patient for reasons such as culture, age, and disability (e.g., the young child or teenager, or someone with speech deficits, hearing deficits, or language difficulties)

Observable Behaviours:

	Uses appropriate communication skills with adolescents (e.g., offers to see them independently, respects the capacity to make decisions, acknowledges issues of confidentiality, specifically directs questions to the adolescent, is not judgmental)

	Adapts communication style to the patient’s disability (e.g., writes for deaf patients)

	Asks about the need for an interpreter and arranges for one

	Speaks at a volume appropriate for the patient’s hearing

	Adapts communication style based on the patient’s cultural expectations or norms (e.g., other family members in the room)

	Uses appropriate words for children and teens (e.g., “pee” vs. “void”)

	Ignores the patient while exclusively engaging the caregiver, especially with children, the elderly, those with cognitive impairment (e.g., no questions to the patient, patient not involved in management plan)

	Makes assumptions based on the patient’s appearance or dress (i.e., stereotyping the patient)

	Uses colloquialisms that the patient does not understand

5.	Attitudinal

This permeates all levels of communication. This includes the ability to hear, understand, and discuss an opinion, idea, or value that may be different from your own while maintaining respect for the patient’s right to decide for himself or herself. Communication conveys respect for the patient.

Observable Behaviours:

	Shows interest in the patient’s opinion

	Is empathetic

	Maintains an appropriate attitude in response to inappropriate/offensive language or comments made by the patient

2020	37 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




	Appears rude

	Appears impatient

	Displays irritation or anger

	Belittles the patient

	Trivializes or dismisses the patient’s ideas or concerns

	Is sarcastic

	Appears intimidating

	Appears arrogant (e.g., ignores the patient’s concerns or opinions about the management plan)
 




















































2020	38 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours





Effective Communication with Colleagues

(“Colleague”, for our purposes, means all members of the health care team.)

1.	Listening Skills

Many specific listening skills are better assessed in the context of communication with patients. Some are well assessed in the context of communication with colleagues.

Observable Behaviours that Can Be Assessed with Colleagues:

	Is attentive

	Stops and takes the time to listen respectfully to colleagues

	Appropriately maintains eye contact while discussing issues with all members of the health care team

	Allows sufficient time for colleagues to articulate their concerns

	Does other tasks that interfere with listening

2.	Language Skills

a)	Verbal:

Adequate to be understood in face-to-face communication, and with all other commonly used methods (e.g., phone, video conferencing, etc.); adequate to understand complex profession-specific conversation; appropriate for colleagues with different backgrounds, professions, and education; appropriate tone for the situation, to ensure good communication and colleague comfort

Observable Behaviours:

	Introduces self when meeting a colleague for the first time

	When asking colleagues to do something, makes a clear request and ensures that it is understood

	Offers rationale for a plan or an approach to improve understanding

	Adjusts tone to be appropriate to circumstances

	Asks rather than demands

	Uses non-blaming, appropriate, and specific observations when addressing difficult circumstances

	Case presentations are poorly organized or incomplete

	Is not specific with requests

	Interrupts colleagues

	Asks multiple questions without awaiting the answers

	Does not target language to the individual’s professional background and level of understanding

	Displays inappropriate anger

	Uses inappropriate humour

	Uses condescending language

	Shouts or uses excessively loud speech

	Swears or uses offensive language

2020	39 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




b)	Written:

(e.g., hospital and office charting, consultant letter, lawyer letter)

•	Clearly articulates and communicates thoughts in a written fashion

•	Has spelling, grammar, legibility, and punctuation that are adequate to facilitate understanding

Observable Behaviours:

	Writes legibly

	Written material is organized

	When writing to request consultation, is specific about questions/reasons and provides relevant information

	Patient-care plans (e.g., test requests, follow-up orders) are:

a)	clearly written and

b)	securely transmitted to the appropriate recipient

	Uses abbreviations that are not universally known or are prone to misinterpretation

c)	Charting Skills

Assessment should concentrate mainly on the charting of individual encounters. Overall organization and structure of the ongoing clinical record are important, but these are often predetermined and outside the control of the individual—they can be assessed, but in a different context. Note that these charting skills are formatted as a set of key features.

a)	A clinical note must

a)	be legible.

b)	avoid using acronyms or abbreviations that may be misunderstood or confusing (e.g., “U” for “units”).

c)	be organized so as to facilitate reading and understanding.

d)	follow an agreed-upon structure within a practice setting.

b)	Charting must be done in a timely fashion, so as to minimize inaccuracies and lost information, and to ensure that the information is available for others involved in care. It should usually be done immediately after the encounter; if delayed, notes must be made to direct the later charting.

c)	Corrections or changes to the note must be clearly visible as such, and dated if not made at the time of the original entry.

d)	Should not write anything in the chart that you would not want the patient to read (e.g., disparaging remarks)

e)	Must not falsify data (e.g., don’t include data in the note that has not been gathered)

f)	The clinical note must

a)	reflect all the phases of the clinical encounter that are relevant to the presenting situation.

2020	40 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




b)	show an obvious and logical link between the data recorded and the conclusions and plan.

c)	include the relevant negative findings, as well as the relevant positive findings.

d)	avoid inappropriate verbatim reporting of the encounter (it should synthesize the data gathered).

g)	As part of ongoing care, acknowledge additional received data (e.g., test results, consultation reports) and document follow-up action when appropriate.

h)	As new information is gathered during an encounter, maintain the chart according to the expectations of the work milieu (e.g., flow sheets, summary page).

i)	Structure and use the clinical record as a tool to try to improve comprehensiveness and continuity of care.

3.	Non-Verbal Skills

a)	Expressive:

Appropriate eye contact, respectful of others’ personal space, appropriate demeanour (e.g., pleasant, smiles appropriately, appropriately serious, attentive, patient and empathetic), and conscious of the impact of body language on the colleague

Observable Behaviours:

	Is focused on the conversation

	Eye contact is appropriate for the culture and comfort of the colleague

	Adjusts demeanour to be appropriate to the colleague’s context

	Physical contact is appropriate for the colleague’s comfort

b)	Receptive:

Aware of and responsive to body language, especially as seen with dissatisfaction; correctly interprets signs of feelings not expressed, such as anger and frustration

Observable Behaviours:

	When a colleague is manifesting signs of distress, demonstrates awareness by actions such as modifying demands, exploring concerns, seeking resolution

4.	Culture and Age Appropriateness

There may be instances where communication with colleagues and other team members from different cultural backgrounds can be problematic. Awareness of these potential problems and subsequent adjustments to communication are elements of competence. This, however, is better assessed in the context of communication with patients and in professionalism.

5.	Attitudinal

This permeates all levels of communication. Competent family physicians possess an attitude that allows them to respectfully hear, understand, and discuss an opinion, idea, or value that may be different from their own.

2020	41 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




Observable Behaviours:

	Seeks to understand rather than judge

	Returns the focus to effective patient care when interprofessional conflicts occur

	Attempts to resolve difficulties before ending the discussion or walking away

	Apologizes when appropriate

	Appears rude

	Appears impatient

	Belittles colleagues or their field of work

	Trivializes or dismisses ideas or concerns of colleagues

	Appears arrogant

	Displays anger or irritation

	Uses derogatory language when describing a patient’s circumstances or case

	Appears threatening or intimidating
 










































2020	42 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours







Professionalism


The key feature analysis of the priority topics for evaluation did not lead to the required detailed operational definition of competence in the dimension of professionalism. It was therefore necessary to use a different process to define this dimension. The working group used a process analogous to the priority topic–key feature approach, more or less simply inverting it. We went from the general behaviours characteristic of professionalism to specific behaviours in certain situations, rather than the other way round.

Twelve general behaviours or themes were identified following analysis of the terms used to describe professionalism by the practicing family physicians who replied to our initial survey. We then used small groups and multiple iterations to generate lists of behaviours in certain situations that reflect on competence in each of the 12 general behaviours and so on the dimension of professionalism as a whole. These 12 themes and examples of behaviours under each theme make up most of the content of this section.

We do not think that it will be pertinent to assess the 12 themes individually as they are rather interdependent, and any separation risks becoming artificial. For example, from the point of view of competence, how can we draw

a	clear line between ethics and professionalism? For the same reason, even though there is considerable overlap between the behaviours listed under the 12 themes, we made little effort to eliminate this overlap: better to have too many concrete examples from which to develop assessment tools and programs than not enough. Any necessary conciliation can be done when this next step (assessment tools and programs) is reached.

There was one other major difference in our approach to the definition of competence in professionalism. Throughout the process of developing evaluation objectives we had intentionally stayed away from test instruments and specific examination scenarios, not wishing to bias the evaluation objectives toward that which is testable by existing instruments or examinations. The process of developing test instruments and examinations has been intentionally left to a second independent step. We soon realized that this was not entirely possible for professionalism, as the nature and structure of our detailed evaluation objectives for this dimension must make some assumptions about the context of the ultimate assessments. Before giving these assumptions, we will first list the observations that justify this slight deviation from our usual approach:

1.	Professionalism is perhaps the most multi-faceted dimension of competence; it is essentially subjective, determined by all those working around the individual (e.g., patients, colleagues, employees, employers, occasional contacts) and the cultural environment in which we find ourselves.

2.	Although there is a considerable body of knowledge on “professionalism”, the demonstration of the possession of this knowledge itself is not sufficient for competence, as it does not seem to predict, in any way, adequate professional behaviour. We are, therefore, more interested in specific behaviours that are indicative of acting professionally than in knowledge about professionalism.

3.	Examples of professional behaviour may be quite context specific, and may depend on local expectations. Expectations in any evaluation situation should, therefore, be quite explicit, and any apparently unprofessional behaviour should first be discussed and explored before any final judgment is made.

2020	43 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




4.	There are many circumstances during practice and training that may demonstrate, to a greater or lesser degree, whether an individual is acting in a professional manner. Professional behaviour is the sum of an appropriate mix of all these. In this sense, there is no one set of key features for professionalism.

5.	No one is expected to be perfect all the time, but we expect certification of competence to imply that the individual acts in a professional manner. Competence in this domain is absent when there is a pattern of repeated unprofessional behaviour that cannot be readily justified or explained. There may also be a single incident of behaviour that is fundamentally incompatible with certification of competence in this dimension.

Professionalism can be defined in theoretical terms or in a pragmatic fashion. We have opted again for the pragmatic fashion, starting with input from practicing family physicians, then using a focus group to identify common themes, and then listing specific examples of behaviours (positive or negative) that reflect on professionalism.

For these reasons we feel that our working definition of competence in professionalism requires the assessment to have certain characteristics:

a)	It must be done on real-life performances, either immediately or at a distance. It would appear to be easiest to do this during residency training; it is just as important, however, to be able to do the equivalent for those already in practice.

b)	Many performances, in many situations, over an extended period of time, must be included in the evaluation. This also implies the involvement of many different assessors or judges of the different performances.

c)	All judgments will be based on certain criteria specific to the situation at hand, but the judgment will still be subjective, made by the observer-assessor most appropriate for the situation and performance.

d)	All initial judgments of unprofessional behaviour must be subject to discussion, and possible resolution, before being maintained. Staff or preceptors may not always behave professionally.

e)	The criteria for certification remain to be established, but it is unlikely that certification of professionalism will be based on scores or averages. Competence is essentially the absence of unprofessional behaviour over a period of sufficient exposure and observation.

Twelve Themes that Define Professionalism in Family Medicine

(Examples of observable behaviours related to each theme can be found on the following pages.)

1.	Day-to-day behaviour reassures one that the physician is responsible, reliable, and trustworthy.

2.	The physician knows his or her limits of clinical competence and seeks help appropriately.

3.	The physician demonstrates a flexible, open-minded approach that is resourceful and deals with uncertainty.
4.	The physician evokes confidence without arrogance, and does so even when needing to obtain further information or assistance.

5.	The physician demonstrates a caring and compassionate manner.

2020	44 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




6.	The physician demonstrates respect for patients in all ways, maintains appropriate boundaries, and is committed to patient well-being. This includes time management, availability, and a willingness to assess performance.
7.	The physician demonstrates respect for colleagues and team members.

8.	Day-to-day behaviour and discussion reassure one that the physician is ethical and honest.

9.	The physician practices evidence-based medicine skillfully. This implies not only critical appraisal and information-management capabilities, but incorporates appropriate learning from colleagues and patients.

10.	The physician displays a commitment to societal and community well-being.

11.	The physician displays a commitment to personal health and seeks balance between personal life and professional responsibilities.

12.	The physician demonstrates a mindful approach to practice by maintaining composure/equanimity, even in difficult situations, and by engaging in thoughtful dialogue about values and motives.

A few remarks on the organization and wording of the behaviours listed under each theme:

Although the behaviours are listed under 12 different themes, they could be considered as one list, to be used in the most general sense as a menu from which to draw concrete examples that can be used when giving feedback on professional or unprofessional behaviour, or when assessing the same in a more structured fashion.

We have not placed the behaviours under each theme in any order of priority. For each theme, positive behaviours are listed first, with negative behaviours second. The choice of positivity or negativity in the formulation was spontaneous—it might be advantageous to generate the opposite formulation when using a particular behaviour in an assessment, but that can be done at the appropriate moment. Some behaviours are quite similar to others, some are opposites, but no conscious effort was made to determine the latter. In general, only the positive or the negative manifestation of the behaviour was described. At the moment, in this list, there are about 80 behaviours expressed positively, and about 50 behaviours expressed negatively.

No standard structure or formulation was used. Some are quite general and others very specific. Taken together, however, we do feel that they provide a sufficient and clear operational definition that can serve as the basis for the development of a structured evaluation of professionalism in most of the contexts applicable to family medicine.

The user will make both the selection and the refinements appropriate to the situation.

1.	Day-to-day behaviour reassures one that the physician is responsible, reliable, and trustworthy.

Observable Behaviours:

	Comes to clinic when expected

	Answers pages when on call

	Notifies attending colleague if he or she is going away and has a maternity patient due or is following an in-patient

	Notifies others when away for illness or emergencies as soon as possible

	Sets up systems for follow-up of patients

	Does not lie

	Does not look up questions after specific requests

	Leaves early, arrives late, without advising

2020	45 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




	Inappropriately double schedules activities

	Switches schedules to personal advantage

	Does not do patient rounds appropriately i.e., too infrequent, too cursory

	Is unavailable for clinical responsibilities for personal reasons, without consideration of the needs of the patient or team

	Allows chart completion to back up unreasonably

	Does not document lab results as normal or abnormal; does not document follow-up

	Does not do letters, summaries

	Cheats on exams or quizzes (e.g., ALSO, NRP)

	Goes into SOOs with foreknowledge of cases (i.e., cheats on exams)

	Does not check allergies or interactions when prescribing

	Fails to follow up in a timely fashion with patients when investigations are pending (e.g., a skin biopsy), or in potentially serious clinical situations (e.g., a depressed adolescent who does not show up for an appointment)

	Lies about prior experience with a procedure to get to do it

	Signs in for others when attendance is taken at academic events

	Plagiarizes on projects

2.	The physician knows his or her limits of clinical competence and seeks help appropriately.

Observable Behaviours:

	Seeks opportunities to address limitations to improve knowledge and skills (electives/continuing education)

	Does not use the excuse of limited clinical competence to avoid challenging clinical problems

	Argues about deficiencies in clinical competence in spite of examples to illustrate concerns

	Ignores clinical problems to mask clinical limitations

	Refers cases even when he or she has the skills and resources to perform the tasks (does not take the time to do appropriate medical procedures)

	Does not initiate the management of complex/difficult problems when a patient presents— defers to an attending physician or a consultant

	Does not prepare adequately for a procedure

3.	The physician demonstrates a flexible, open-minded approach that is resourceful and deals with uncertainty.

Observable Behaviours:

	In patient encounters, consistently demonstrates a willingness to explore the patient’s ideas of cause and take steps to include or exclude these from the ensuing differential diagnosis

	Is willing to adapt diagnosis/plan when provided with an alternative view/information/perspective (willing to change his or her mind)

	Provides time to deal with the emotion related to an uncertain diagnosis

	Does not unnecessarily limit patient options (i.e., does not display paternalism)

	Is satisfied with “symptom diagnosis” (e.g., says “dyspepsia”, not “peptic ulcer disease”) when information is

limited or diagnosis is not confirmable
2020	46 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




	Formulates a patient-centred stepwise plan to deal with a situation even when he or she doesn’t know the answer

	Cuts patients off

	Refuses to deal with a major problem during an office visit because of time

	Refuses to see a patient who arrives slightly late for an appointment

	Shows anger/rigidity when patients don’t follow a prescribed course of action

	Becomes dismissive of patient ideas when they don’t fit his or her own

	Uses manipulative techniques to influence patient behaviour (“I won’t be able to take care of you if you choose to do…”)

4.	The physician evokes confidence without arrogance, and does so even when needing to obtain further information or assistance.

Observable Behaviours:

	Says, “I don’t know but I know how I am going to find out”

	Management discussions with patients are clearly helpful to the patient with “value added”, even without a certain diagnosis or final opinion about available treatment

	Projects appropriate confidence in non-verbal communication: looks patients in the eye when he or she says,“I don’t know”

	Uses own experience to devalue the patient’s experience (e.g., “I didn’t have to have an epidural”)

	Tells patients what to do without understanding their circumstances (displays arrogance, paternalism)

5.	The physician demonstrates a caring and compassionate manner.

Observable Behaviours:

	Allows patients time to verbalize their concerns without cutting them off; listens for a while before talking— actively listens before talking

	Does not belittle the patient’s losses/fears

	Asks patients about their feelings, worries, hopes

	Sits down with patients whenever possible while communicating

	Addresses issues or behaviours with patients rather than confronting them personally or judgmentally

	Expands on healthy options or choices with patients

	Keeps patients’ needs foremost when faced with own personal concerns about medical errors/disasters/accusations

	Is willing to acknowledge the patient’s emotions within the encounter

	Does not blame patients for difficult situations they encounter

	When dealing with a difficult patient, recognizes his or her own feelings and avoids expressing anger inappropriately

	Despite time and workload pressure, maintains a pleasant, compassionate approach
 


2020	47 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




6.	The physician demonstrates respect for patients in all ways, maintains appropriate boundaries, and is committed to patient well-being. This includes time management, availability, and a willingness to assess performance.

Observable Behaviours:

	Respects the patient’s time as if it were his or her own: does his or her best to be on time; acknowledges when he or she is not

	Does not impose personal religious, moral, or political beliefs on a patient

	Does not ask for or accept offers of dates from patients

	Does not ask patients for favours

	Does not accept inappropriate gifts

	Does not make jokes at a patient’s expense

	Respects a patient’s lifestyle choices as his or hers to make

	Appreciates the power differential in the physician-patient interaction

	Maintains personal appearance to facilitate patient comfort and confidence for individual patients, or for specific patient populations

	Comments and behaviours reinforce and enhance the patient’s abilities and capabilities

	Does not lend patients money (or borrow money from patients)

	Recognizes the difference between maintaining confidentiality and seeking appropriate professional advice when needed in difficult situations

	Actively looks at his or her practice with assessment tools, and implements appropriate changes

	Thinks and speaks about patients in a positive manner

	Attempts to understand the patient’s issues that precipitate difficult behaviour or non-compliance, and adapts his or her response accordingly

	Always seems rushed or burdened by too many demands

	Complains about other team members in front of patients

	Blames others for a personal lack of organization or harried approach (“Who took my stethoscope this time?”, “Where’s my pen?”, “I’m late because there are no parking spots”, “The secretary didn’t remind me I had to be there”, “My charts weren’t out”)

	Is reluctant or refuses to see some patients

7.	The physician demonstrates respect for colleagues and team members.

Observable Behaviours:

	Does not undermine and avoids making negative comments about other providers, especially those who may have seen patients in different settings or contexts

	When consulted or asked for help, listens to concerns and tries to respond positively and to be available (“How can I help?” vs. “I don’t need to see this patient”)

	When needing to talk to someone unexpectedly, waits and picks the right moment; does not interrupt unduly

	Thinks and speaks about colleagues in a positive manner; respects their time as if it were his or her own

	Arrives on time

2020	48 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




	Pays attention when others are speaking

	Lets others speak/continue; hears them out and stays respectful even if he or she may not agree with topics or points of view

	Provides inappropriate feedback in an insensitive manner (non-specific, wrong place, wrong time)

	Leaves early, picks the easy tasks, leaves tasks unfinished, etc., such that others have more work

	Discusses contentious issues in public, or gossips

	Avoids the discussion of contentious issues that are having or may have a major impact on team dynamics and outcomes

	Argues with other team members

	Does not make personal adjustments in spite of repeated messages from others about performance in the workplace

	A male trainee does not accept feedback from a female colleague or faculty

	Does other things (i.e., does not pay attention) while a colleague is speaking (e.g., text messages, reads paper, does charts)

8.	Day-to-day behaviour and discussion reassure that the physician is ethical and honest.

Observable Behaviours:

	When an error has been made, acknowledges his or her own contribution, discusses it with the appropriate parties, tries to clarify why the error was made and apply corrective action for the future

	Obtains informed consent, asks about privacy/communication/confidentiality

	Respects patient autonomy, and assesses whether patient decision making is impaired

	Provides honest estimates concerning time, services, and billing

	Discloses patient information against his or her expressed wishes, especially with respect to adolescents, the elderly, and patients with different cultural issues

	Discusses patients in “public” places

	Provides medical treatment inappropriately to colleagues, including writing prescriptions

	Claims (to colleagues, patients, others) to have done something that has not been done (e.g., history, physical exam, lab tests, phone calls, follow-up)

	Takes credit for work done by others (for monetary reasons, for prestige, for any reason)

	Has inappropriate prescribing practices:

o	Puts in the name of someone with a drug plan instead of the patient o Prescribes inappropriately for self-gain

o  Prescribes without sufficient assessment

	Makes unjustifiable claims on insurance or other forms

9.	The physician practices evidence-based medicine skillfully. This implies not only critical appraisal and information-management capabilities, but incorporates appropriate learning from colleagues and patients.

Observable Behaviours:

2020	49 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours






	Does not give undue weight to evidence-based medicine: incorporates the patient’s and family’s expertise about the uniqueness of their situation; incorporates the experience and expertise of colleagues and team members, as well as his or her own

	When a patient questions care or makes suggestions, is open to respectful discussion; responds positively to patients who bring materials from the Internet

	When using guidelines or the results of clinical trials (on large populations), customizes and adapts them to ensure applicability to the individual patient in question

	Does not change a current treatment plan when temporarily dealing with someone else’s patient; if thinks changes are desirable, discusses them first with the regular provider

	Checks as to whether practice is consistent with recent evidence, and makes changes consistent with this evidence

	Identifies knowledge gaps in own clinical practice, and develops a strategy to fill it; frames clinical questions that will facilitate the search for “answers” to these gaps


	Does not use resources to acquire up-to-date information about specific cases

	Following a group discussion and decision, does not incorporate agreed-upon changes into clinical practice

	Relies too much on a limited set of inappropriate information resources (e.g., drug company representatives, unselected Internet material, The Medical Post, “expert” opinion)

	Does not critically question information


10.	The physician displays a commitment to societal and community well-being.

Observable Behaviours: **

	Does not dismiss concerns raised by patients on local issues that have an impact on their health (e.g., safe walking areas, pollution)

	Tries to empower the patient who raises concerns about community issues; acts in a confidential manner

	Responds positively to community requests for participation: will dedicate some time and experience, some resources (e.g., put a poster up)

	Does not respect the duty to report in situations where there is a clear danger to others (e.g., meningococcal disease, capacity to drive, child abuse)

	Does not report inappropriate behaviour (e.g., substance abuse) of professional colleagues to the appropriate supervisor or authority

**	Although many examples around this theme may be found later in practice, we do not think it practical or fair to assess this theme in great detail at the time of certification, namely during training or at the very beginning of independent practice. The other themes of professionalism provide better opportunities for the appropriate assessment of this dimension.
 



2020	50 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




11.	The physician displays a commitment to personal health and seeks balance between personal life and professional responsibilities.

Observable Behaviours:

	Takes appropriate time to fulfill personal needs

	Is willing to discuss observations from colleagues or team members when behaviour suggests difficulty because of stress

	When a conflict between professional and personal activities is brought to his or her attention, discusses it, makes an appropriate adjustment or not

	Sometimes puts the patient first, ahead of personal need, and demonstrates satisfaction and appreciation of the value of this action

	Has a healthy lifestyle: does not smoke, does not drink to excess, drives reasonably

	Takes frustration, etc., out on colleagues/staff (e.g., is rude and inappropriate)

	Fails or refuses to recognize or deal with significant illness or a condition that may have an impact on professional activities, especially when concerns are identified by others

	Stays overtime inappropriately, comes to work sick, is unwilling to take time off

	Burdens co-workers when taking care of own needs (i.e., leaves many things undone without communicating with colleagues)

	Transfers tasks to colleagues without clear justification, without adequate communication; changes availability for professional tasks “frequently”, “at the last minute”

	Seeks medical care from friends or colleagues outside of a normal physician-patient relationship; acts as own physician

12.	The physician demonstrates a mindful approach to practice by maintaining composure/equanimity, even in difficult situations, and by engaging in thoughtful dialogue about values and motives.

Observable Behaviours:

	Given a difficult situation, maintains composure and is able to act appropriately (e.g., with angry patients, an unexpected clinical turn of events, an overwhelming demand, examinations)

	Is consistently attentive to a patient or colleague throughout any interaction

	Tries to understand the behaviour of others without getting mad or being hurt

	Does not display anger, inappropriate humour, or other emotions when this could undermine constructive work with patients or colleagues

	When emotions are intense or visible, can nevertheless explain or suggest a constructive plan of action

	Does not lose his or her cool—even when the other person in the room loses it

	Can allow for multiple perspectives from various participants in complex situations; entertains or solicits other viewpoints

	Is willing to engage in dialogue, in order to learn from experience and others, when

o	a bad/unexpected outcome occurs o there are conflicting ideas
 

2020	51 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




o	he or she is asked questions (does not perceive these as a threat; makes time to discuss them vs. being “too busy to talk about it”)

	When a mistake appears to have been made, acknowledges it and looks first for personal responsibility rather than directing blame elsewhere
 


























































2020	52 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours







Clinical Reasoning Skills


This dimension of competence is one of two that are currently almost entirely defined by and within the key features of the priority topics.

Each key feature suggests, explicitly or implicitly, the dimensions of competence as well as the phase of the clinical encounter, and, hence, the specific cognitive skills, that are characteristic of competence when dealing with the problem in question. All the key features have been individually coded as to the skills and phases assessed, but these codes are not yet visible in this version of the evaluation objectives document—the majority of the key features (60%), however, involve clinical reasoning skills, so using them in an unselected fashion will certainly touch on this dimension.

Clinical reasoning is a more familiar territory and the framework used is that of clinical problem solving using the hypothetico-deductive model, with particular emphasis, however, on using it in an expert fashion. The skilled physician will use this model efficiently, in a manner adapted to the patient’s needs, as well as to those of the problem at hand and the context of the encounter, to deal with a patient’s problems.

What are some of the characteristics of expert clinical reasoning, as opposed to the not-yet-expert? Repeated studies have shown that the history is the most important part of the clinical encounter and that it is usually sufficient to suggest the correct diagnoses. We use the term “diagnosis” in its widest sense, including problem identification at all levels, not just medical diagnoses. The experienced clinician often generates the diagnostic possibilities or hypotheses within the first minute of the clinical encounter. The expert then uses these hypotheses to direct the subsequent data gathering: he may collect less information than a non-expert, but the information selected is often much more detailed around the important points—he or she gathers the data necessary to deal with the problem, and does not lose time gathering non-contributory information for the problem at hand. The data is interpreted as it is obtained, to finish with a second round of diagnostic hypotheses—this step certainly requires expertise, but it is often self-evident if the initial diagnostic hypotheses and the data gathering have been done in a skilled fashion. The physical examination and investigation phase often play minor roles—indeed it is often a question of confirming or eliminating diagnostic possibilities generated by the history.

Is it reasonable to almost equate clinical reasoning skills (and medical problem solving) with skill in arriving at an accurate diagnosis? Most would agree with this assumption, for two reasons. First, management and treatment certainly require skill, but they are heavily knowledge dependent, so they are situated closer to the lower cognitive levels of clinical competence, as well as being particularly dependent on an accurate set of diagnoses. Second, with a few domain-specific exceptions, the various cognitive and non-cognitive skills required in the later phases of the clinical encounter are all required to a higher degree in making an accurate and pertinent diagnosis.
 







2020	53 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours







Of course, although skill at making accurate diagnoses is a necessary element of competence in clinical reasoning skills, it is probably not sufficient by itself. A well-planned assessment of competence in clinical reasoning skills will put great emphasis on taking the history and making diagnoses, but it will also include some tasks situated in the later parts of the clinical encounter. It will not do this in a random fashion, however. This brings us back to the concept of the interaction between the patient, the physician, and the problem. Each interaction will itself determine which steps are most critical: for some it may well be the treatment or the physical examination, and, if this is so, then this is where competence lies for this interaction, and this is what should be assessed. The challenge, for valid assessment, is to match the evaluation with the interaction. The key feature analysis did this, so the best definition of competence in clinical reasoning skills can be found in the Priority Topics and Key Features List.
 















































2020	54 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours






Selectivity

This dimension has not, to our knowledge, been previously described with respect to physician competence, although it is surely not an original idea. It is the term that was chosen by the initial focus group to describe a set of skills that was frequently cited in the survey as characterizing the competent family physician: such a physician does not do things in a routine or stereotypical fashion but is very adaptable and selective in approach, modifying it to suit both the situation and the patient. Some of the ways in which a physician demonstrates competence in this dimension are as follows:

•	Sets priorities and focuses on the most important

•	Knows when to say something and when not to

•	Gathers the most useful information without losing time on less contributory data

•	Does something extra when it will likely be helpful

•	Distinguishes the emergent from the elective and intervenes in a timely fashion

•	Acts when necessary, even though information may be incomplete

•	Determines the likelihoods, pertinence, and priorities in his or her differential diagnoses

•	Distinguishes the sick from the not sick

•	Selects and modifies a treatment to fit the particular needs of a patient and a situation

Selectivity could perhaps be considered a subset of all the other dimensions, but it was used frequently enough in the descriptions of competence to merit its own dimension. As we saw earlier, selectivity is found at the higher levels of competence, and it could be an extremely robust indicator of overall competence when used for assessment purposes. It could also be considered to be one of the operational levels that go to make up clinical judgment, and provides a way to assess this important concept.

This dimension of competence is one of two that are currently almost entirely defined by and within the key features of the priority topics. Each key feature suggests, explicitly or implicitly, the dimensions of competence, as well as the phase of the clinical encounter, and, hence, the specific cognitive skills that are characteristic of competence when dealing with the problem in question. Sixteen percent of the key features involve selectivity as an essential skill, most often (although not exclusively) associated with clinical reasoning skills. It may be sufficient to assess selectivity only in this context, but we could also envisage its assessment in other dimensions, if necessary. The concept surely applies. It would simply remain to develop a further operational definition of selectivity as it is expressed in the other dimensions.
 








2020	55 | P a g e
 
Part II—Essential Skills, Themes, and Observable Behaviours




Procedure Skills


Certification for independent practice requires a certain level of experiential competence: this includes the technical skills to perform a certain number of procedures. Sixty-five core procedures are listed below, and these are the procedures upon which the assessment of competence will be based19. It should be remembered that it is not only the technical aspects of the individual procedures that are important. The higher levels of competence must also be assessed, as always, in the context of family medicine—the key features describe this aspect.

The General Key Features of Procedure Skills*

1.	In order to decide whether or not you are going to do a procedure, consider the following:

a)	The indications and contraindications to the procedure

b)	Your own skills and readiness to do the procedure (e.g., your level of fatigue and any personal distractions)

c)	The context of the procedure, including the patient involved, the complexity of the task, the time needed, the need for assistance, and location

2.	Before deciding to go ahead with the procedure:

a)	Discuss the procedure with the patient, including a description of the procedure and possible outcomes, both positive and negative, as part of obtaining their consent.

b)	Prepare for the procedure by ensuring the appropriate equipment is ready.

c)	Mentally rehearse the following:

o  The anatomic landmarks necessary for procedure performance.

o The technical steps necessary in sequential fashion, including any preliminary examination. o The potential complications and their management.
3.	During performance of the procedure:

o	Keep the patient informed to reduce anxiety. o Ensure patient comfort and safety always.

4.	When the procedure is not going as expected, re-evaluate the situation, and stop and/or seek assistance as required.

5.	Develop a plan with your patient for after care and follow-up after completion of a procedure.


*	Apply to all procedures. These can be used to guide the development of specific evaluation tools for specific procedures.






19	19 Wetmore SW, Rivet C, Tepper J, Tatemichi S, Donoff M, Rainsberry P. Defining core procedure skills for Canadian family medicine training. Can Fam Physician. 2005; 51(10): 1364-5.

 



2020	56 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features



Priority Topics

Abdominal Pain ....................................................................................................................
60

Advanced Cardiac Life Support ................................................................................................
61

Allergy ................................................................................................................................
62

Anemia................................................................................................................................
63

Antibiotics ...........................................................................................................................
64

Anxiety................................................................................................................................
65

Asthma................................................................................................................................
66

Atrial Fibrillation...................................................................................................................
67

Bad News.............................................................................................................................
68

Behavioural Problems .............................................................................................................
69

Breast Lump .........................................................................................................................
70

Cancer .................................................................................................................................
71

Chest Pain............................................................................................................................
72

Chronic Disease ....................................................................................................................
73

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.....................................................................................
74

Chronic Pain ........................................................................................................................
75

Contraception .......................................................................................................................
76

Cough .................................................................................................................................
77

Counselling ..........................................................................................................................
78

Crisis ..................................................................................................................................
79

Croup..................................................................................................................................
81

Deep Venous Thrombosis .......................................................................................................
82

Dehydration .........................................................................................................................
83

Dementia .............................................................................................................................
84

Depression ...........................................................................................................................
86

Diabetes...............................................................................................................................
88

Diarrhea ..............................................................................................................................
89

Difficult Patient.....................................................................................................................
90

Disability .............................................................................................................................
91

Dizziness .............................................................................................................................
92

Domestic Violence .................................................................................................................
93

Dyspepsia.............................................................................................................................
94

Dysuria................................................................................................................................
95

Earache................................................................................................................................
96

Elderly.................................................................................................................................
98

Epistaxis ..............................................................................................................................
99

Family Issues ......................................................................................................................
100

Fatigue ..............................................................................................................................
101

Fever .................................................................................................................................
102

Fractures............................................................................................................................
103

Gastro-intestinal Bleed..........................................................................................................
104

Gender Specific Issues ..........................................................................................................
105

2020	57 | P a g e
 

	Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features
Grief .................................................................................................................................
106

Headache ...........................................................................................................................
107

Heart Failure ......................................................................................................................
108

Hepatitis............................................................................................................................
109

Hyperlipidemia ...................................................................................................................
110

Hypertension......................................................................................................................
111

Immigrants.........................................................................................................................
112

Immunization .....................................................................................................................
113

In Children.........................................................................................................................
114

Infections ...........................................................................................................................
115

Infertility ...........................................................................................................................
116

Insomnia............................................................................................................................
117

Ischemic Heart Disease .........................................................................................................
118

Joint Disorder .....................................................................................................................
119

Lacerations .........................................................................................................................
120

Learning (Patients/Self) ........................................................................................................
121

Lifestyle .............................................................................................................................
122

Loss of Consciousness ...........................................................................................................
123

Loss of Weight ....................................................................................................................
124

Low-back Pain ....................................................................................................................
125

Meningitis ..........................................................................................................................
126

Menopause .........................................................................................................................
127

Mental Competency .............................................................................................................
128

Multiple Medical Problems ....................................................................................................
130

Neck Pain ..........................................................................................................................
131

Newborn ...........................................................................................................................
132

Obesity..............................................................................................................................
133

Osteoporosis.......................................................................................................................
134

Pain ..................................................................................................................................
135

Palliative Care .....................................................................................................................
136

Parkinsonism ......................................................................................................................
137

Periodic Health Assessment/Screening ....................................................................................
138

Personality Disorder.............................................................................................................
139

Pneumonia .........................................................................................................................
140

Poisoning ...........................................................................................................................
142

Pregnancy ..........................................................................................................................
143

Prostate .............................................................................................................................
145

Rape/Sexual Assault.............................................................................................................
146

Rash .................................................................................................................................
147

Red Eye .............................................................................................................................
148

Renal Failure ......................................................................................................................
149

Schizophrenia .....................................................................................................................
150

Seizures .............................................................................................................................
151

Sex ...................................................................................................................................
152

Sexually Transmitted Infections..............................................................................................
153

Shortness of Breath ..............................................................................................................
154

Skin Disorder .....................................................................................................................
155

Smoking Cessation...............................................................................................................
156

Somatization ......................................................................................................................
157

2020	58 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Stress	158
Stroke	159
Substance use and addiction	160
Suicide	162
Thyroid	163
Trauma	164
Travel Medicine	165

Upper Respiratory Tract Infection	166

Urinary Tract Infection	167
Vaginal Bleeding	168
Vaginitis	169
Violent/Aggressive Patient	170

Well-baby Care	171
 

















































2020	59 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Abdominal Pain

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1	Given a patient with abdominal pain, paying particular attention to its location and chronicity:

	a) Distinguish between acute and chronic pain.	Clinical Reasoning		History
	b) Generate a complete differential diagnosis (ddx).	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation
				Diagnosis
	c) Investigate in an appropriate and timely fashion.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Investigation
				
2	In a patient with diagnosed abdominal pain (e.g., gastroesophageal	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment
	reflux disease, peptic ulcer disease, ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s			
	disease), manage specific pathology appropriately (e.g., with.			
	medication, lifestyle modifications).			
				
3	In a woman with abdominal pain:			Hypothesis generation
	a) Always rule out pregnancy if she is of reproductive age.	Clinical Reasoning		Investigation
	b) Suspect gynecologic etiology for abdominal pain.	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation
	c) Do a pelvic examination, if appropriate.	Clinical Reasoning		Physical
				Diagnosis
				
4	In a patient with acute abdominal pain, differentiate between a	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Physical
	surgical and a non-surgical abdomen.			Diagnosis
				
5	In specific patient groups (e.g., children, pregnant women, the	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
	elderly), include group-specific surgical causes of acute abdominal			Diagnosis
	pain in the ddx.			


6	Given a patient with a life-threatening cause of acute abdominal pain (e.g., a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm or a ruptured

		ectopic pregnancy):	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
		a) Recognize the life-threatening situation.			
					
		b) Make the diagnosis.	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
		c) Stabilize the patient.	Selectivity	Treatment	
			Clinical Reasoning		
		d) Promptly refer the patient for definitive treatment.	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
				Referral	
					
	7	In a patient with chronic or recurrent abdominal pain:			
		a) Ensure adequate follow-up to monitor new or changing	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up	
		symptoms or signs.			
		b) Manage symptomatically with medication and lifestyle	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		modification (e.g., for irritable bowel syndrome).	Communication		
		c) Always consider cancer in a patient at risk.	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
				Diagnosis	
					
	8	Given a patient with a diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		(IBD) recognize an extra intestinal manifestation.		Diagnosis	
					

 


2020	60 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Advanced Cardiac Life Support

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	Keep up to date with advanced cardiac life support (ACLS)	Professionalism	Treatment
	recommendations (i.e., maintain your knowledge base).		
			
2	Promptly defibrillate a patient with ventricular fibrillation (V fib),	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Treatment
	or pulseless or symptomatic ventricular tachycardia (V tach).		

 

3	Diagnose serious arrhythmias (V tach, V fib, supraventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, or second- or third-degree heart block), and treat according to ACLS protocols.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Treatment

 
4	Suspect and promptly treat reversible causes of arrhythmias (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
	hyperkalemia, digoxin toxicity, cocaine intoxication) before			Treatment
	confirmation of the diagnosis.			
				
5	Ensure adequate ventilation (i.e., with a bag valve mask), and secure	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment
	the airway in a timely manner.			
				
6	In patients requiring resuscitation, assess their circumstances (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning		Diagnosis
	asystole, long code times, poor pre-code prognosis, living wills) to			Treatment
	help you decide when to stop. (Avoid inappropriate resuscitation.)			

 

7	In patients with serious medical problems or end-stage disease, discuss code status and end-of-life decisions (e.g., resuscitation, feeding tubes, levels of treatment), and readdress these issues periodically.

 


Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Follow-up

 
8	Attend to family members (e.g., with counselling, presence in the	Professionalism	Treatment
	code room) during and after resuscitating a patient.	Communication	
			
9	In a pediatric resuscitation, use appropriate resources ( e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	Braeslow tape, the patient’s weight) to determine the correct drug		
	doses and tube sizes.		
			



Note: Shock is not dealt with in this topic.
 




















2020	61 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Allergy

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	In all patients, always inquire about any allergy and clearly	Clinical Reasoning	History
	document it in the chart. Re-evaluate this periodically.		Follow-up
			
2	Clarify the manifestations of a reaction in order to try to diagnose a	Clinical Reasoning	History
	true allergic reaction (e.g., do not misdiagnose viral rashes as		Diagnosis
	antibiotic allergy, or medication intolerance as true allergy).		

 

3	In a patient reporting allergy (e.g., to food, to medications, environmental), ensure that the patient has the appropriate medication to control symptoms (e.g., antihistamines, bronchodilators, steroids, an EpiPen).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
4  Prescribe an EpiPen to every patient who has a history of, or is at	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
risk for, anaphylaxis.		

 

5	Educate appropriate patients with allergy (e.g., to food, medications, insect stings) and their families about the symptoms of anaphylaxis and the self-administration of the EpiPen, and advise them to return for immediate reassessment and treatment if those symptoms develop or if the EpiPen has been used.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up

 
	6	Advise patients with any known drug allergy or previous major	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		allergic reaction to get a MedicAlert bracelet.	Patient-centred Approach		
					
	7	In a patient presenting with an anaphylactic reaction:	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
		a) Recognize the symptoms and signs.			
			Clinical Reasoning		
		b) Treat immediately and aggressively.	Selectivity	Treatment	
			Clinical Reasoning		
		c) Prevent a delayed hypersensitivity reaction through	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		observation and adequate treatment (e.g., with steroids).			
					
	8	In patients with anaphylaxis of unclear etiology refer to an allergist	Clinical Reasoning	Referral	
		for clarification of the cause.			
					
	9	In the particular case of a child with an anaphylactic reaction to			
		food:			
		a) Prescribe an EpiPen for the house, car, school, and daycare.	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
					
		b) Advise the family to educate the child, teachers, and	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		caretakers about signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis, and about			
		when and how to use the EpiPen.			
					
	10	In a patient with unexplained recurrent respiratory symptoms,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis Generation	
		include allergy (e.g., sick building syndrome, seasonal allergy) in the			
		differential diagnosis.			
					

 






2020	62 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Anemia

	Key Feature	Skill		Phase	
					
1	Assess the risk of decompensation of anemic patients (e.g., volume	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
	status, the presence of congestive heart failure [CHF], angina, or			Treatment	
	other disease states) to decide if prompt transfusion or volume				
	replacement is necessary.				
					
2	In a patient with anemia, classify the anemia as microcytic,	Clinical Reasoning		Diagnosis	
	normocytic, or macrocytic by using the MCV (mean corpuscular			Investigation	
	value) or smear test result, to direct further assessment and				
	treatment.				
					
3	In all patients with anemia, determine the iron status before	Clinical Reasoning		Investigation	
	initiating treatment.			Diagnosis	
					
4	In a patient with iron deficiency, investigate further to find the	Clinical Reasoning		Investigation	
	cause.				
					
5	Consider and look for anemia in appropriate patients (e.g., those at	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis Generation	
	risk for blood loss [those receiving anticoagulation, elderly patients			Investigation	
	taking a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug]) or in patients with				
	hemolysis (mechanical valves), whether they are symptomatic or				
	not, and in those with new or worsening symptoms of angina or				
	CHF.				
					
6	In patients with macrocytic anemia:	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis Generation	
	a) Consider the possibility of vitamin B12 deficiency.				
	b) Look for other manifestations of the deficiency (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning		History	
	neurologic symptoms) in order to make the diagnosis of pernicious			Physical	
	anemia when it is present.				
					
7	As part of well-baby care, consider anemia in high-risk populations	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis Generation	
	(e.g., those living in poverty) or in high-risk patients (e.g., those who				
	are pale or have a low-iron diet or poor weight gain).				

 

8	When a patient is discovered to have a slightly low hemoglobin level, look carefully for a cause (e.g., hemoglobinopathies, menorrhagia, occult bleeding, previously undiagnosed chronic disease), as one cannot assume that this is normal for them.

 


Clinical Reasoning Selectivity Hypothesis Generation Diagnosis

 
9  In anemic patients with menorrhagia, determine the need to look	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis Generation
for other causes of the anemia.		
		

 












2020	63 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Antibiotics

		Key Feature	Skill	Phase
				
	1	In patients requiring antibiotic therapy, make rational choices (i.e.,	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Treatment
		first-line therapies, knowledge of local resistance patterns, patient’s		
		medical and drug history, patient’s context).		
				
	2	In patients with a clinical presentation suggestive of a viral infection,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		avoid prescribing antibiotics.		
				
	3	In a patient with a purported antibiotic allergy, rule out other	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis Generation
		causes (e.g., intolerance to side effects, non-allergic rash) before		History
		accepting the diagnosis.		
				
	4	Use a selective approach in ordering cultures before initiating	Selectivity	Investigation
		antibiotic therapy (usually not in uncomplicated cellulitis,		
		pneumonia, urinary tract infections, and abscesses; usually for		
		assessing community resistance patterns, in patients with systemic		
		symptoms, and in immunicompromised patients).		
				
	5	In urgent situations (e.g., cases of meningitis, septic shock, febrile	Selectivity	Treatment
		neutropenia), do not delay administration of antibiotic therapy (i.e.,		
		do not wait for confirmation of the diagnosis).		
				

 





































2020	64 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Anxiety

	Key Feature		Skill	Phase	
				
1	For a patient with multiple unexplained symptoms or behaviours, look for	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis Generation	
	anxiety as a primary or contributing cause.	Patient-centred Approach	Diagnosis	
				
2	When a patient presents with symptoms of anxiety, clearly distinguish	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	between distress (e.g. fear, nervousness, worry) and an anxiety disorder.	Patient-centred Approach	Diagnosis	
				
3	In a patient presenting with acute symptoms of panic (e.g., shortness of	Selectivity	Hypothesis Generation	
	breath, palpitations, hyperventilation), do not attribute the symptoms to	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	anxiety without first excluding serious medical pathology (e.g., pulmonary			
	embolism, myocardial infarction) from the differential diagnosis, especially			
	in patients with established anxiety disorder.			
				
4	When working up a patient with symptoms of anxiety, and before making	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
	the diagnosis of an anxiety disorder,			
	a) Exclude serious medical pathology	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
	b) Identify:		Clinical reasoning	History	
	•   other co-morbid psychiatric conditions			
	•	abuse			
	•	substance use			
	c) Assess the risk of suicide	Clinical reasoning	History	
	d) Discuss functional impact with the patient	Patient-centred Approach	History	
				
5	When an anxiety disorder is suspected, assess and classify according to	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
	established diagnostic criteria, as treatment will vary according to the			
	classification.				

 

6	In patients with known anxiety disorders, do not assume all new symptoms are attributable to the anxiety disorder.

 


Selectivity	Hypothesis generation

Clinical reasoning

 
7	When planning management of anxiety, offer appropriate treatment, which	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	may include one or a combination of the following:		Referral
	•   Self-management techniques		
	•   Regular office follow-up		
	•		Community resources		
	•	Structured therapies (Cognitive Behavioral Therapy,		
			psychotherapy)		
	•		Judicious use of pharmacotherapy		
	•	Referral to other health professionals with ongoing shared		
			care		
			
8	When managing anxiety or an anxiety disorder do not use medication as a	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	sole treatment.		Clinical reasoning	
			
9	When assessing and managing anxiety, discuss the use of alcohol and	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	substances as harmful self-medication.	Communication	
					

 




2020	65 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Asthma

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In patients of all ages with respiratory symptoms (acute, chronic, recurrent):
a)	Include asthma in the differential diagnosis.

b)	Confirm the diagnosis of asthma by appropriate use of:

-	history.

-	physical examination.

-	spirometry.

 



Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

Clinical Reasoning	History

Physical

 
2	In a child with acute respiratory distress, distinguish asthma or	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	History	
	bronchiolitis from croup and foreign body aspiration by taking an			Physical	
	appropriate history and doing a physical examination.				
					
3	In a known asthmatic, presenting either because of an acute	Clinical Reasoning		Diagnosis	
	exacerbation or for ongoing care, objectively determine the severity				
	of the condition (e.g., with history, including the pattern of				
	medication use), physical examination, spirometry). Do not				
	underestimate severity.				
					
4	In a known asthmatic with an acute exacerbation:	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
	a) Treat the acute episode (e.g., use beta-agonists repeatedly				
and early steroids, and avoid under-treatment).
 

b)	Rule out co-morbid disease (e.g., complications, congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).

c)	Determine the need for hospitalization or discharge (basing the decision on the risk of recurrence or complications, and on the patient’s expectations and resources).

 


Selectivity	Hypothesis generation

Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Selectivity	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning

 
	5  For the ongoing (chronic) treatment of an asthmatic, propose a	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	stepwise management plan including:	Patient Centered		
	- self-monitoring.			
	- self-adjustment of medication.			
	- when to consult back.			
				
	6  For a known asthmatic patient, who has ongoing or recurrent			
	symptoms:	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	a) Assess severity and compliance with medication regimens.			
		Patient Centered	Diagnosis	
	b) Recommend lifestyle adjustments (e.g., avoiding irritants,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	triggers) that may result in less recurrence and better control.	Patient Centered		
				

 










2020	66 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Atrial Fibrillation

		Key Feature	Skill		Phase	
						
	1	In a patient who presents with new onset atrial fibrillation, look for	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
		an underlying cause (e.g., ischemic heart disease, acute myocardial				
		infarction, congestive heart failure, cardiomyopathy, pulmonary				
		embolus, hyperthyroidism, alcohol, etc.)				
						
	2	In a patient presenting with atrial fibrillation,	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
		a) Look for hemodynamic instability,				
		b) Intervene rapidly and appropriately to stabilize the patient.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
						
	3	In an individual presenting with chronic or paroxysmal atrial				
		fibrillation,	Patient-centred Approach	Diagnosis	
		a) Explore the need for anticoagulation based on the risk of			
		stroke with the patient,	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
						
		b) Periodically reassess the need for anticoagulation.	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
					Follow-up	
						
	4	In patients with atrial fibrillation, when the decision has been made	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
		to use anticoagulation, institute the appropriate therapy and patient			Follow-up	
		education, with a comprehensive follow-up plan.				
						
	5	In a stable patient with atrial fibrillation, identify the need for rate	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
		control.			Treatment	
						
	6	In a stable patient with atrial fibrillation, arrange for rhythm	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
		correction when appropriate.			Treatment	
						

 





























2020	67 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Bad News

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	When giving bad news, ensure that the setting is appropriate, and	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	ensure patient’s confidentiality.	Communication	
			
2	Give bad news:	Communication	Treatment

•	in an empathic, compassionate manner

•	allowing enough time.

•	providing translation, as necessary


	3	Obtain patient consent before involving the family.	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
			Professionalism	
				
	4	After giving bad news, arrange definitive follow-up opportunities to	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up
		assess impact and understanding.	Communication	
				

 













































2020	68 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Behavioural Problems

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In all patients, when working up a behavioural problem,

a)	Ensure a thorough assessment of medical and mental health conditions (e.g., schizophrenia in adolescents and young adults) and psychosocial factors before offering a diagnosis or definitive advice (i.e., do not dismiss the problem as being “a phase,” or “hormones,” or “just adolescence”)
 


Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Patient-centred Approach	History

 
b)	Use a validated assessment tool if available

c)	Use multiple sources of information (e.g., workplace, family, school) with consent
 

Selectivity	History

Clinical reasoning	Investigation

Professionalism	History

 
	d) Explore the patient’s own perspective, not just that of the	Patient-centred Approach	History	
	caregiver			
				
2	In assessing behavioural problems in adolescents specifically look for	Clinical reasoning	History	
	substance use, peer issues, abuse, and other stressors.	Patient-centred Approach		
			
3  While assessing behavioural problems in a patient,	Clinical reasoning	History	
	a) Evaluate the impact of the behaviour			
		Patient-centred Approach		
	b) Explore any underlying emotional distress with the patient	Communication	History	
		Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	c) Destigmatize embarrassing behaviours	Communication	Treatment	
		Patient-centred Approach		
				
4	When making a diagnosis of a behavioural problem in a patient,	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Avoid premature labelling of a behaviour as a disorder		Diagnosis	
	b) Follow up with support and regular visits until the	Clinical reasoning	Follow-up	
	situation is clearer and any therapeutic requirements are more			
	evident			

 

5	When managing behavioural problems:

a)	Assess and address immediate risk for the patient and

others

b)	Do not limit treatment to medication; address other dimensions (e.g., do not just use amphetamines to treat ADD, but add social skills teaching, time management, etc.) and match to available community resources

 



Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

 
6	When there is a challenging relationship with a patient with behavioural problems maintain a continuous, therapeutic, and non-judgmental relationship with the patient and family.

 

Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up

Professionalism

 






2020	69 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Breast Lump

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	Given a well woman with concerns about breast disease, during a clinical encounter (annual or not):
a)	Identify high-risk patients by assessing modifiable and non-modifiable risk factors

b)	Advise regarding screening (mammography, breast self-examination) and its limitations.
 



Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	History

Diagnosis

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach

 
c) Advise concerning the woman’s role in preventing or	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
detecting breast disease (breast self-examination, lifestyle changes).	Patient-centred Approach		
			
2  Given a woman presenting with a breast lump (i.e., clinical			
features):	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
a) Use the history, features of the lump, and the patient’s age to			
determine (interpret) if aggressive work-up or watchful waiting is	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
			
indicated.			
b) Ensure adequate support throughout investigation of the	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
breast lump by availability of a contact resource.	Professionalism	Follow-up	
c) Use diagnostic tools (e.g., needle aspiration, imaging, core	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
biopsy , referral) in an appropriate manner (i.e., avoid over- or		Treatment	
under-investigation, misuse) for managing the breast lump.			
			
3  In a woman who presents with a malignant breast lump and knows			
the diagnosis:	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
a) Recognize and manage immediate and long-term			
complications of breast cancer.		Treatment	
			
b) Consider and diagnose metastatic disease in the follow-up	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
care of a breast cancer patient by appropriate history and		History	
investigation.			

 
c)	Appropriately direct (provide a link to) the patient to community resources able to provide adequate support (psychosocial support).

 

Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 



















2020	70 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Cancer

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In all patients, be opportunistic in giving cancer prevention advice (e.g., stop smoking, reduce unprotected sexual intercourse, prevent human papillomavirus infection), even when it is not the primary reason for the encounter.

 


Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Communication

 
2  In all patients, provide the indicated evidence-based screening	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity  Diagnosis
(according to age group, risk factors, etc.) to detect cancer at an	
early stage (e.g., with Pap tests, mammography, colonoscopy, digital	
rectal examinations, prostate-specific antigen testing).	

 

3	In patients diagnosed with cancer, offer ongoing follow-up and support and remain involved in the treatment plan, in collaboration with the specialist cancer treatment system. (Don’t lose track of your patient during cancer care.)

 


Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up

Professionalism	Treatment

 
4	In a patient diagnosed with cancer, actively inquire, with compassion and empathy, about the personal and social consequences of the illness (e.g., family issues, loss of job), and the patient’s ability to cope with these consequences.

 

Patient-centred Approach	History

Communication

 
5	In a patient treated for cancer, actively inquire about side effects or	Clinical Reasoning	History
	expected complications of treatment (e.g., diarrhea, feet		Follow-up
	paresthesias), as the patient may not volunteer this information.		
			
6	In patients with a distant history of cancer who present with new	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	symptoms (e.g., shortness of breath, neurologic symptoms), include		
	recurrence or metastatic disease in the differential diagnosis.		

 

7	In a patient diagnosed with cancer, be realistic and honest when discussing prognosis. (Say when you don’t know.)

 


Communication	Treatment

Professionalism	Follow-up

 

Note: For pain control, see the key features on chronic disease and palliative care. See also the key feature on depression.
 






















2020	71 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Chest Pain

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  Given a patient with undefined chest pain, take an adequate history	Clinical Reasoning	History
to make a specific diagnosis (e.g., determine risk factors, whether		
the pain is pleuritic or sharp, pressure, etc.).		

 

2  Given a clinical scenario suggestive of life-threatening conditions	Selectivity

(e.g., pulmonary embolism, tamponade, dissection, pneumothorax), begin timely treatment (before the diagnosis is confirmed, while doing an appropriate work-up).

 


Diagnosis

Treatment

 
3  In a patient with unexplained chest pain, rule out ischemic heart	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity  Hypothesis generation
disease.*	Investigation


4	Given an appropriate history of chest pain suggestive of herpes zoster infection, hiatal hernia, reflux, esophageal spasm, infections,
or peptic ulcer disease:	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
a) Propose the diagnosis.			
			
b) Do an appropriate work-up/follow-up to confirm the	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
suspected diagnosis.			

 

5	Given a suspected diagnosis of pulmonary embolism:

a)	Do not rule out the diagnosis solely on the basis of a test with low sensitivity and specificity.
 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

 
b) Begin appropriate treatment immediately.	Selectivity	Treatment

 
































2020	72 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Chronic Disease

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In a patient with a diagnosed chronic disease who presents with acute symptoms, diagnose:

•	acute complications of the chornic disease (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis).

•	acute exacerbations of the disease (e.g., asthma exacerbation, acute arthritis).
 


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

 
•	a new, unrelated condition.


2	Regularly reassess adherence (compliance) to the treatment plan	Clinical Reasoning	History
	(including medications).		Follow-up
			
3	In patients with chronic disease:		

a) Actively inquire about pain.	Clinical Reasoning	History
b) Treat appropriately by:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
•   titrating medication to the patient's pain.		Hypothesis generation

•	taking into account other treatments and conditions (e.g., watching for interactions).

•	considering non-pharmacologic treatment and adjuvant therapies.


4  In patients with chronic disease, actively inquire about:	Patient-centred Approach	History
•	the psychological impact of diagnosis and treatment.	Clinical Reasoning	
•	functional impairment.		
•   underlying depression or risk of suicide.		
•	underlying substance abuse.		

 

5	Given a non-compliant patient, explore the reasons why, with a view to improving future adherence to the treatment plan.

 


Patient-centred Approach	History

 
























2020	73 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In all patients presenting with symptoms of prolonged or recurrent Clinical Reasoning cough, dyspnea, or decreased exercise tolerance, especially those
who also have a significant smoking history, suspect the diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

 


Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

 
2	When the diagnosis of COPD is suspected, seek confirmation with	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation
	pulmonary function studies (e.g., FEV1).		
			
3	In patients with COPD, use pulmonary function tests periodically	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation
	to document disease progression.		Follow-up
			
4	Encourage smoking cessation in all patients diagnosed with	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	COPD.*	Patient-centred Approach	
			
5	Offer appropriate vaccinations to patients diagnosed with COPD	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	(e.g., influenza/pneumococcal vaccination).		
			
6	In an apparently stable patient with COPD, offer appropriate	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	inhaled medication for treatment (e.g.,		
anticholinergics/bronchodilators if condition is reversible, steroid trial).

 

7	Refer appropriate patients with COPD to other health professionals (e.g., a respiratory technician or pulmonary rehabilitation personnel) to enhance quality of life.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Referral

 
8  When treating patients with acute exacerbations of COPD, rule out Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
co-morbidities (e.g., myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure,	Diagnosis
systemic infections, anemia).	

 

9	In patients with end-stage COPD, especially those who are currently stable, discuss, document, and periodically re-evaluate wishes about aggressive treatment interventions.

 


Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up

 

See also: Smoking Cessation
 



















2020	74 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Chronic Pain

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	In a patient with chronic pain:		
	a) Establish the etiology	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis
		Selectivity	
	b) Reassess and periodically review the etiology (e.g., previously	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis
	undisclosed abuse, evolution of the underlying cause)	Selectivity	Follow-up
	c) Periodically look for potential comorbidities or complications,	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
	particularly mental illness and addictions		Follow-up
2	In a patient with chronic pain who complains of significantly increased	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
	pain, search for an alternative etiology (e.g., malignancy, addiction,		Diagnosis
	diversion) as you cannot assume that the original cause of the pain is the		
	reason for the exacerbation.		
3	In a patient in whom you did not make the initial diagnosis of chronic pain:

	a)	Establish an effective relationship	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	b)	Verify the diagnosis	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
	c)	Clarify goals of treatment and plans for management	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
4   In managing a patient with chronic pain:			
	a) Use shared decision-making	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	b) Engage other professionals in this care when appropriate	Patient-centered approach		
		Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
			Professionalism	Referral	
5   In a patient with chronic pain:			
	a)	Comprehensively document the assessment, plan, goals, and	Communication	Follow-up	
		prescription details			
	b)	Make the treatment plan appropriately accessible (e.g., to the	Communication	Follow-up	
		patient, team members, emergency department, on-call doctors,	Professionalism		
		pharmacy)			
6	When prescribing medications with abuse potential in a patient with	Professionalism	Diagnosis	
	chronic pain where you have no established relationship or insufficient	Selectivity	Treatment	
	records, be prudent in your prescribing (e.g., limit doses, document			
	reasons, check for double doctoring). Do not simply provide or refuse to			
	prescribe.			
7	Use a written treatment contract with realistic consequences (e.g., limiting	Communication	Treatment	
	prescribed quantities/carries) when prescribing medications with abuse	Professionalism	Follow-up	
	potential to a patient with chronic pain.			
8	When a patient with chronic pain has breached a contract:			
	a)	Manage your own emotions	Professionalism	Treatment	
	b)	Address the possible impact on your staff and team	Professionalism	Treatment	
	c)	Apply or judiciously amend the contract (e.g., not putting a	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
		patient into immediate withdrawal)	Professionalism		
9	In a patient with chronic pain and addiction who presents with a	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis	
	destabilization of behaviour, carefully identify the etiology and	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	contributing factors to adapt your management plan.			

 







2020	75 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Contraception

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	With all patients, especially adolescents, young men, postpartum women, and perimenopausal women, advise about adequate contraception when opportunities arise.

 


Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Communication

 
2  In patients using specific contraceptives, advise of specific factors	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
that may reduce efficacy (e.g., delayed initiation of method, illness,	Patient-centred Approach		
medications, specific lubricants).			
			
3  In aiding decision-making to ensure adequate contraception:			
a) Look for and identify risks (relative and absolute	Clinical Reasoning	History	
contraindications).			
b) Assess (look for) sexually transmitted disease exposure.	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	Patient-centred Approach		
c) Identify barriers to specific methods (e.g., cost, cultural	Patient-centred Approach	History	
concerns).	Communication		
d) Advise of efficacy and side effects, especially short-term side	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
effects that may result in discontinuation.			

 

4	In patients using hormonal contraceptives, manage side effects appropriately (i.e., recommend an appropriate length of trial, discuss estrogens in medroxyprogesterone acetate [Depo– Provera]).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
	5	In all patients, especially those using barrier methods or when	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		efficacy of hormonal methods is decreased, advise about post-coital		
		contraception.		
				
	6	In a patient who has had unprotected sex or a failure of the chosen	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		contraceptive method, inform about time limits in post-coital		
		contraception (emergency contraceptive pill, intrauterine device).		
				

 























2020	76 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Cough

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In patients presenting with an acute cough:

a)	Include serious causes (e.g., pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism [PE]) in the differential diagnosis.
 


Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Hypothesis generation

 
b) Diagnose a viral infection clinically, principally by taking an   Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
appropriate history.	

 
c)	Do not treat viral infections with antibiotics. (Consider antiviral therapy if appropriate.)

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
2	In pediatric patients with a persistent (or recurrent) cough, generate	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	a broad differential diagnosis (e.g., gastroesophageal reflux disease			
	[GERD], asthma, rhinitis, presence of a foreign body, pertussis).			
				
3	In patients with a persistent (e.g., for weeks) cough:	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Consider non-pulmonary causes (e.g., GERD, congestive			
	heart failure, rhinitis), as well as other serious causes (e.g., cancer,		Diagnosis	
	PE) in the differential diagnosis. (Do not assume that the child has			
	viral bronchitis).			
	b) Investigate appropriately.	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
				
4	Do not ascribe a persistent cough to an adverse drug effect (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	from an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor) without first			
	considering other causes.			

 

5	In smokers with persistent cough, assess for chronic bronchitis (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) and make a positive diagnosis when it is present. (Do not just diagnose a smoker’s cough.)

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

 


























2020	77 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Counselling

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	When counselling a patient:

a)	Set clear therapeutic goals with the patient

b)	Allow adequate time

c)	Evaluate your own skills (e.g., Does the problem exceed the limits of your abilities? Are you the right person and is this the right time to unpack the patient’s concerns?)
 



Clinical reasoning	Treatment
Patient-centred Approach	
Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
Professionalism	
Professionalism	Treatment

 
d) Recognize when you are approaching or exceeding	Professionalism	Treatment
boundaries (e.g., transference, counter-transference)		
e) Recognize when your beliefs or biases may interfere with	Professionalism	Treatment
counselling		
f) Remain aware of the risks of offering advice versus providing	Professionalism	Treatment
options		

 
g)	Pay close attention to the quality of the therapeutic relationship and alliance

 

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Communication	Follow-up

 

2	For a patient who is considering or requesting referral for counselling/psychotherapy, clarify concerns and provide realistic information about the process and available resources (e.g., expectations, timing, frequency, costs, duration, homework, starting/ending the relationship if ineffective).

 


Clinical reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	Referral

 


See also: Crisis
 

























2020	78 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Crisis

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	When a patient presents with acute emotional distress:

a)	Take the necessary time to assist the patient, even if

they present unexpectedly
 


Selectivity	Hypothesis generation

 
		b) Acknowledge their feelings and help them de-escalate	Communication	History	
			Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
		c) Employ the therapeutic effect of conversation	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
			Communication		
				
	2  As part of your management of a patient facing a crisis:	Clinical reasoning		
		a) Identify your patient’s personal resources for support			
		(e.g., family, internal strength, friends) as part of your management	Patient-centred Approach	History	
		of a patient facing a crisis.		Treatment	
					
		b) Offer appropriate community resources (e.g.,	Selectivity	Treatment	
		counsellor) as part of your ongoing management of a patient with	Patient-centred Approach	Referral	
		a crisis			
		c) Negotiate a follow-up plan with the patient	Communication	Treatment	
			Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
		d) Be careful not to cross boundaries when treating a	Professionalism	Treatment	
		patient in crisis (e.g., lending money, providing appointments		Hypothesis	
		outside regular hours)			
					
	3	When a patient presents with emotional distress or declares			
		themselves in crisis:	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
		a) Carefully assess the risk of harm to themselves or others			
				History	
		b) Ask your patient if there are others needing help	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
		associated with the crisis	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
		c) Act accordingly	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
			Selectivity	Treatment	
					
	4	Use psychoactive medication rationally to assist patients in crisis.	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
			Selectivity	Treatment	
					
	5	Inquire about unhealthy coping methods (e.g., drugs, alcohol,	Clinical Reasoning	History	
		eating, gambling, violence, sloth, promiscuity) in your patients	Professionalism		
		facing crisis.			
					
	6	Prepare your practice environment for possible crises or disasters	Professionalism	Hypothesis generation	
		and include colleagues and staff in the planning for both medical		Treatment	
		and non-medical crises.			
					

 







2020	79 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

 




7	When dealing with an unanticipated medical crisis (e.g., seizure, shoulder dystocia):
a)	Be calm and methodical

b)	Assess the environment for needed and available resources (people, material)

c)	Ask for the help you need

d)	Take timely action as appropriate in the context of the situation (e.g., resuscitation in the waiting room of the clinic versus in the emergency department)

 







Professionalism	History

Clinical reasoning	Treatment

Selectivity	Treatment


Professionalism	Treatment

Communication	Referral

Clinical reasoning	Treatment

Selectivity

 
8	In all patients, to identify possible previous crises and avoid re-traumatization during medical encounters:
a)	Be attentive to triggers for re-traumatization

b)	Recognize different manifestations of emotional distress


c)	Address as appropriate

 



Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation
Patient-centred Approach	Diagnosis
Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis
Patient-centred Approach	
Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis
Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

 




































2020	80 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Croup

	Key Feature	Skill		Phase	
					
1	In patients with croup,	Selectivity		Hypothesis generation	
	a) Identify the need for respiratory assistance (e.g., assess				
	ABCs, fatigue, somnolence, paradoxical breathing, in drawing)	Clinical Reasoning		Diagnosis	
	b) Provide that assistance when indicated.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
					
2	Before attributing stridor to croup, consider other possible causes	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
	(e.g., anaphylaxis, foreign body (airway or esophagus),			Diagnosis	
	retropharyngeal abcess, epiglottitis).				
					
3	In any patient presenting with respiratory symptoms, look	Clinical Reasoning		History	
	specifically for the signs and symptoms that differentiate upper			Physical	
	from lower respiratory disease (e.g., stridor vs. wheeze vs. whoop).				
					
4	In a child presenting with a clear history and physical examination	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
	compatible with mild to moderate croup, make the clinical			Investigation	
	diagnosis without further testing (e.g., do not routinely X-ray).				

 

5	In patients with a diagnosis of croup, use steroids (do not under treat mild-to-moderate cases of croup).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
6	In a patient presenting with croup, address parental concerns (e.g., not minimizing the symptoms and their impact on the parents), acknowledging fluctuating course of the disease, providing a plan anticipating recurrence of the symptoms.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Communication	Follow-up

 
































2020	81 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Deep Venous Thrombosis

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  In patients complaining of leg pain and/or swelling, evaluate the	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
likelihood of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) as investigation and		Diagnosis
treatment should differ according to the risk.		

 

2	In patients with high probability for thrombotic disease (e.g., extensive leg clot, suspected pulmonary embolism) start anticoagulant therapy if tests will be delayed.

 


Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Treatment

 
	3	Identify patients likely to benefit from DVT prophylaxis.	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
			Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
				
	4	Utilize investigations for DVT allowing for their limitations (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Investigation
		Ultrasound and D-dimer).		Diagnosis
				
	5	In patients with established DVT use oral anticoagulation	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		appropriately, (e.g., start promptly, watch for drug interactions,		Follow-up
		monitor lab values and adjust dose when appropriate, stop warfarin		
		when appropriate,provide patient teaching).		
				
	6	Consider the possibility of an underlying coagulopathy in patients	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		with DVT, especially when unexpected.		
				
	7	Use compression stockings in appropriate patients, to prevent and	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		treat post-phlebitic syndrome.		
				

 

































2020	82 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Dehydration

		Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
					
	1	When assessing the acutely ill patient, look for signs and symptoms	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		of dehydration. (e.g., look for dehydration in the patient with a			
		debilitating pneumonia).			
					
	2	In the dehydrated patient, assess the degree of dehydration using	Clinical Reasoning	Physical	
		reliable indicators (e.g., vital signs) as some patients' hydration		Investigation	
		status may be more difficult to assess (e.g., elderly, very young,			
		pregnant).			
					
	3	In a dehydrated patient,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		a) Determine the appropriate volume of fluid for replacement			
		of deficiency and ongoing needs,		Diagnosis	
		b) Use the appropriate route (oral if the patient is able; IV	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		when necessary).			
					
	4	When treating severe dehydration, use objective measures (e.g., lab	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
		values) to direct ongoing management.		Treatment	
					
	5	In a dehydrated patient,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		a) Identify the precipitating illness or cause, especially looking			
		for non-gastro-intestinal, including drug-related, causes,			
		b) Treat the precipitating illness concurrently.	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
					
	6	Treat the dehydrated pregnant patient aggressively, as there are	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
		additional risks of dehydration in pregnancy.		Treatment	
					

 





























2020	83 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Dementia

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1  In patients with early, non-specific signs of cognitive impairment:
a) Suspect dementia as a diagnosis.

		Hypothesis generation	
	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
b) Use validated tests of cognitive function and careful	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
functional inquiry, as well as a careful history (including collateral			
history from family and caregivers if available) and physical			
examination, to make an early positive diagnosis.			
			
2  In patients with obvious cognitive impairment,	Clinical reasoning	Investigation	
a) Select proper laboratory investigations and neuroimaging			
techniques to complement the history and physical findings and to			
distinguish between dementia, delirium, and depression			

 
b)	Consider possible contributing causes, including mental health, alcohol or substance use problems, or delirium

 

Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
3	In patients with dementia, distinguish Alzheimer’s disease from other dementias, as treatment and prognosis differ.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

 
4	In patients with dementia who exhibit worsening function, look for	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	other diagnoses (i.e., don’t assume the dementia is worsening).		Diagnosis	
	These diagnoses may include depression, infection, concurrent			
	medical illness, substance use, etc.			
				
5	When disclosing the diagnosis of dementia,	Patient-centred Approach	Diagnosis	
	a) Do so compassionately			
		Communication	Treatment	
	b) Respect the patient’s right to autonomy, confidentiality, and	Professionalism	Treatment	
	safety			
				
6	In patients with dementia, assess competency to involve them in	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	decision making, as appropriate to the situation		Treatment	
				
7	In following patients diagnosed with dementia:	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up	
	a) Assess function and cognitive impairment on an ongoing			
	basis.		Physical	
	b) Assist with and plan for appropriate interventions (e.g., deal	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	with medication issues, behavioural disturbance management, safety	Patient-centred Approach		
	issues, caregiver issues, comprehensive care plans, advanced care			
	planning, driving safety, placement) in the context of disease			
	progression			

 
c)	Manage comorbidities, including mental health problems based on the goals of care

d)	Review pharmacotherapy (e.g. side effects, drug interaction, polypharmacy)

 

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Clinical reasoning

Selectivity	Treatment

 
8	Assess the needs of and supports for caregivers of patients with dementia.

 

Patient-centred Approach	History

 
2020	84 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


	9	Report patients with dementia to the appropriate authorities if you	Professionalism	Treatment
		suspect they should not be driving.	Clinical Reasoning	
				
	10	In patients with early-onset dementia, consider genetic testing	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
			Patient-centred Approach	History
				

 



























































2020	85 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Depression

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In a patient with a diagnosis of depression:

a)	Assess the patient for the risk of suicide

b)	Decide on appropriate management (i.e., hospitalization or close follow-up, which will depend, for example, on severity of symptoms, psychotic features, and suicide risk)

 


Clinical reasoning	History

Communication	Diagnosis

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
2	Identify patients who may be at a higher risk for depression (e.g.,	Clinical reasoning	History	
	certain socio-economic groups, those who suffer from substance			
	abuse, postpartum women, people with chronic pain) and assess			
	appropriately.			
				
3	In patients who have medically unexplained symptoms consider and	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	assess for depression.	Patient-centred Approach	History	
				
4	After a diagnosis of depression is made look for and diagnose other	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	comorbid psychiatric conditions (e.g., anxiety, bipolar disorder,		Diagnosis	
	personality disorder).			
				
5	In a patient diagnosed with depression:			
	a) Manage appropriately (e.g., medications, psychotherapy,	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	supported self-management)			
		Patient-centred Approach		
	b) Monitor their response to therapy and modify appropriately	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	(e.g., augmentation, dose changes, medication changes)		Follow-up	
	c) Reassess the patient’s safety	Clinical reasoning	Follow-up	
	d) Set goals, including a return-to-work plan	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	e) Refer as necessary (including community resources)	Clinical reasoning	Referral	
		Patient-centred Approach		
				
6	In a patient presenting with symptoms consistent with depression	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	consider and rule out serious organic pathology using a targeted		History	
	history, physical examination, and investigations (especially in			
	elderly or difficult patients).			

 

7	In patients presenting with depression inquire about abuse:

•	Sexual, physical, and emotional abuse (past and current, witnessed or inflicted)

•	Addictions (e.g., substance use/abuse, gambling)

 


Clinical reasoning	History

Selectivity

 
8	In a patient with symptoms of depression differentiate major depression from adjustment disorder, dysthymia, and a grief reaction.

 

Clinical reasoning	History

Diagnosis

 
9	Following failure of an appropriate treatment in a patient with depression consider other diagnoses (e.g., bipolar disorder, schizoaffective disorder, organic disease).

 

Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
10  In very young and elderly patients presenting with changes in	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		
2020		86 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


behaviour consider the diagnosis of depression (as they may not present with classic features).


11  When treating a patient with antidepressants use them in a selective	Clinical reasoning	History
and careful manner, adapted to the presentation and the needs of	Selectivity	Treatment
the individual patient, by:		
•   Selecting the most appropriate antidepressant and dose for		
the patient based on patient factors and on		
pharmacological factors (e.g., possible drug interactions)		
•   Monitoring medication effectiveness, including adherence		
and the patient’s possible self-medication using other		
substances (e.g., herbal and naturopathic remedies, alcohol,		
cannabis)		
•   Considering augmentation strategies when appropriate		
•   Monitoring side effects carefully when initiating treatment,		
especially in young and elderly patients		
•   Discontinuing medication gradually, monitoring for		
relapse, recognizing risk, and following response		


12	When developing a return-to-work plan for a patient who is being treated for depression:
a) Assess the impact of residual symptoms on work	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
hardiness, performance, and safety	Selectivity		
			
b)Communicate with the patient and the workplace to	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
ensure the plan is realistic and provides clear guidance	Communication		
			

 
































2020	87 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Diabetes

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	Given a symptomatic or asymptomatic patient at high risk for	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Investigation
	diabetes (e.g., patients with gestational diabetes, obese, certain		Hypothesis generation
	ethnic groups, and those with a strong family history), screen at		
	appropriate intervals with the right tests to confirm the diagnosis.		
			
2	Given a patient diagnosed with diabetes, either new-onset or	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	established, treat and modify treatment according to disease status		Follow-up
	(e.g., use oral hypoglycemic agents, insulin, diet, and/or lifestyle		
	changes).		

 

3	Given a patient with established diabetes, advise about signs and treatment of hypoglycemia/hyperglycemia during an acute illness or stress (i.e., gastroenteritis, physiologic stress, decreased intake.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach

 
4	In a patient with poorly controlled diabetes, use effective	Communication Patient-	Treatment	
	educational techniques to advise about the importance of optimal	centred Approach		
	glycemic control through compliance, lifestyle modification, and			
	appropriate follow-up and treatment.			
				
5	In patients with established diabetes:	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Look for complications (e.g., proteinuria).			
			Diagnosis	
	b) Refer them as necessary to deal with these complications	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
			Follow-up	
				
6	In the acutely ill diabetic patient, diagnose the underlying cause of	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Diagnosis	
	the illness and investigate for diabetic ketoacidosis and		Treatment	
	hyperglycemia.			

 

7	Given a patient with diabetic ketoacidosis, manage the problem appropriately and advise about preventing future episodes.

 


Clinical Reasoning Selectivity Treatment Follow-up

 
























2020	88 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Diarrhea

	Key Feature	Skill		Phase	
					
1	In all patients with diarrhea,	Clinical Reasoning		Diagnosis	
	a) Determine hydration status,				
	b) Treat dehydration appropriately.	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
					
2	In patients with acute diarrhea, use history to establish the possible	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
	etiology (e.g., infectious contacts, travel, recent antibiotic or other			History	
	medication use, common eating place for multiple ill patients).				
					
3	In patients with acute diarrhea who have had recent hospitalization	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
	or recent antibiotic use, look for clostridium difficile.				
					
4	In patients with acute diarrhea, counsel about the timing of return	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
	to work/school (re: the likelihood of infectivity).				
					
5	Pursue investigation, in a timely manner, of elderly with	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
	unexplained diarrhea, as they are more likely to have pathology.			Investigation	
					
6	In a young person with chronic or recurrent diarrhea, with no red	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
	flag symptoms or signs, use established clinical criteria to make a				
positive diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome (do not

overinvestigate).

 

7	In patients with chronic or recurrent diarrhea, look for both gastro - Clinical Reasoning intestinal and non-gastro-intestinal symptoms and signs suggestive
of specific diseases (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, malabsorption syndromes, and compromised immune system).

 


History

Physical

 






























2020	89 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Difficult Patient

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	When physician-patient interaction is deemed difficult, diagnose	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	personality disorder when it is present in patients.		
			
2	When confronted with difficult patient interactions, seek out and	Patient-centred Approach	History
	update, when necessary, information about the patient’s life		Diagnosis
	circumstances, current context, and functional status.		

 

3	In a patient with chronic illness, expect difficult interactions from time to time. Be especially compassionate and sensitive at those times.

 


Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Professionalism	Follow-up

 
4	With difficult patients remain vigilant for new symptoms and physical findings to be sure they receive adequate attention (e.g., psychiatric patients, patients with chronic pain).

 

Selectivity	Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

 
	5	When confronted with difficult patient interactions, identify your	Professionalism	Treatment
		own attitudes and your contribution to the situation.		Diagnosis
				
	6	When dealing with difficult patients, set clear boundaries.	Professionalism	Treatment
				
	7	Take steps to end the physician-patient relationship when it is in	Professionalism Patient-	Treatment
		the patient’s best interests.	centred Approach	
				
	8	With a difficult patient, safely establish common ground to	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
		determine the patient’s needs (eg. threatening or demanding	Professionalism	
		patients).		
				

 






























2020	90 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Disability

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	Determine whether a specific decline in functioning (e.g., social, physical, emotional) is a disability for that specific patient.

 


Patient-centred Approach	Diagnosis

Clinical Reasoning

 
2	Screen elderly patients for disability risks (e.g., falls, cognitive	Clinical Reasoning	History
	impairment, immobilization, decreased vision) on an ongoing basis.		Hypothesis generation
			
3	In patients with chronic physical problems (e.g., arthritis, multiple	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	sclerosis) or mental problems (e.g., depression), assess for and	Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation
	diagnose disability when it is present.		

 

4	In a disabled patient, assess all spheres of function (emotional, physical, and social, the last of which includes finances, employment, and family).

 


Patient-centred Approach	History

 
5	For disabled patients, offer a multi-faceted approach (e.g., orthotics, lifestyle modification, time off work, community support) to minimize the impact of the disability and prevent further functional deterioration.

 

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Professionalism

 
6	In patients at risk for disability (e.g., those who do manual labour, the elderly, those with mental illness), recommend primary prevention strategies (e.g., exercises, braces, counselling, work modification).

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach

 
7	Do not limit treatment of disabling conditions to a short-term disability leave (i.e., time off is only part of the plan).

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach

 






























2020	91 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Dizziness

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  In patients complaining of dizziness, rule out serious cardiovascular,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
cerebrovascular, and other neurologic disease (e.g., arrhythmia,		Diagnosis
myocardial infarction [MI], stroke, multiple sclerosis).		

 

2	In patients complaining of dizziness, take a careful history to distinguish vertigo, presyncope, and syncope.

 


Clinical Reasoning	History

 
3	In patients complaining of dizziness, measure postural vital signs.	Clinical Reasoning	Physical
		Procedures Skills	
			
4	Examine patients with dizziness closely for neurologic signs.	Clinical Reasoning	Physical
		Procedures Skills	Hypothesis generation
			
5	In hypotensive dizzy patients, exclude serious conditions (e.g., MI,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	abdominal aortic aneurysm, sepsis, gastrointestinal bleeding) as the		Diagnosis
	cause.		
			
6	In patients with chronic dizziness, who present with a change in	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	baseline symptoms, reassess to rule out serious causes.		Diagnosis
			
7	In a dizzy patient, review medications (including prescription and	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	over-the-counter medications) for possible reversible causes of the		Diagnosis
	dizziness.		
			
8	Investigate further those patients complaining of dizziness who	Selectivity	Investigation
	have:		

•	signs or symptoms of central vertigo.

•	a history of trauma.

•	signs, symptoms, or other reasons (e.g., anticoagulation) to suspect a possible serious underlying cause.

 



























2020	92 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Domestic Violence

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	In a patient with new, obvious risks for domestic violence, take	Patient-centred Approach	History	
	advantage of opportunities in pertinent encounters to screen for	Clinical Reasoning		
	domestic violence (e.g., periodic annual exam, visits for			
	anxiety/depression, ER visits).			
				
2	In a patient in a suspected or confirmed situation of domestic	Selectivity	History	
	violence:			
	a) Assess the level of risk and the safety of children (i.e., the	Clinical Reasoning		
	need for youth protection).			
	b) Advise about the escalating nature of domestic violence.	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		Patient-centred Approach		
				
3	In a situation of suspected or confirmed domestic violence, develop,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	in collaboration with the patient, an appropriate emergency plan to	Patient-centred Approach		
	ensure the safety of the patient and other household members.			

 

4	In a patient living with domestic violence, counsel about the cycle of domestic violence and feelings associated with it (e.g., helplessness, guilt), and its impact on children.

 


Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Communication

 





































2020	93 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Dyspepsia

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In a patient presenting with dyspepsia, include cardiovascular disease in the differential diagnosis.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
	2	Attempt to differentiate, by history and physical examination,	Clinical Reasoning	History
		between conditions presenting with dyspepsia (e.g.,		Physical
		gastroesophageal reflux disease, gastritis, ulcer, cancer), as plans for		
		investigation and management may be very different.		
				
	3	In a patient presenting with dyspepsia, ask about and examine the	Clinical Reasoning	History
		patient for worrisome signs/symptoms (e.g., gastrointestinal		Physical
		bleeding, weight loss, dysphagia).		
				

 















































2020	94 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Dysuria

	Key Feature	Skill		Phase
				
1	In a patient presenting with dysuria, use history and dipstick	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Diagnosis
	urinalysis to determine if the patient has an uncomplicated urinary			
	tract infection.			
				
2	When a diagnosis of uncomplicated urinary tract infection is made,	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment
	treat promptly without waiting for a culture result.			

 

3	Consider non-urinary tract infection related etiologies of dysuria (e.g., prostatitis, vaginitis, sexually transmitted disease, chemical irritation) and look for them when appropriate.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
4  When assessing patients with dysuria, identify those at higher risk	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity  Hypothesis generation
of complicated urinary tract infection (e.g., pregnancy, children,	
diabetes, urolithiasis).	

 

5	In patients with recurrent dysuria, look for a specific underlying cause (e.g., post-coital urinary tract infection, atrophic vaginitis, retention).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 








































2020	95 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Earache

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	Make the diagnosis of otitis media (OM) only after good visualization of the eardrum (i.e., wax must be removed), and when sufficient changes are present in the eardrum, such as bulging or distorted light reflex (i.e., not all red eardrums indicate OM).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Procedures Skills	Physical

 
2	Include pain referred from other sources in the differential	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	diagnosis of an earache (eg. Tooth abscess, trigeminal Neuralgia,		
	TMJ dysfunction, pharyngitis, etc.).		
			
3	Consider serious causes in the differential diagnosis of an earache	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	(eg. tumors, temporal arteritis, mastoiditis).		
			
4	In the treatment of otitis media, explore the possibility of not giving	Selectivity	Treatment
	antibiotics, thereby limiting their use (e.g., through proper patient	Communication	
	selection and patient education because most otitis Media is of viral		
	origin), and by ensuring good follow-up (e.g., reassessment in 48		
	hours).		
			
5	Make rational drug choices when selecting antibiotic therapy for the	Selectivity	Treatment
	treatment of otitis media. (Use first-line agents unless given a	Professionalism	
	specific indication not to.)		

 

6	In patients with earache (especially those with otitis media), recommend appropriate pain control (oral analgesics).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
	7	In a child with a fever and a red eardrum, look for other possible	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		causes of the fever (i.e., do not assume that the red ear is causing the		
		fever).*		
				
	8	Test children with recurrent ear infections for hearing loss.	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation
				


See also: Fever
 























2020	96 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Eating Disorders

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	During clinical encounters with children, adolescents, and young	Clinical reasoning	History
	adults include an assessment of the risk of eating disorders,	Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation
	irrespective of the patient’s gender, as this may be the only		
	opportunity.		
2	When caring for a patient with ongoing psychological distress or	Clinical reasoning	History
	unexplained physical symptoms ask about body image and self-	Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation
	harm behaviours, including disordered eating.		
3	In a patient for whom concerns about eating behaviours have been	Clinical reasoning	History
	identified take an appropriate history, including:	Patient-centred Approach	

•	Eating patterns, relationship with food, body image, distress

•	Underlying mental health, alcohol, and substance use problems, including previous psychological trauma

•	Use of prescribed and over-the-counter medications, tobacco, caffeine, laxatives, and supplements
4	In a patient with disordered eating behaviour(s):	Clinical reasoning	Physical	
	a) Assess for physiological and metabolic complications			
	b)Determine if there is a need for hospitalization or	Patient-centred Approach	Investigation	
		Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	immediate intervention	Patient-centred Approach		
5  When an eating disorder has been diagnosed:	Professionalism	Treatment	
	a) Discuss the impact and potential consequences,			
	regardless of the patient’s acceptance of the diagnosis	Patient-centred Approach		
	b) Engage the parents/caregivers/partners in treatment	Professionalism	Treatment	
	when appropriate and with consent	Patient-centred Approach		
				
	c) Collaborate with the patient and, when appropriate,	Communication	Treatment	
	family to develop a treatment plan, including an inter- and intra-	Patient-centred Approach	Referral	
	professional referral when necessary			
	d) Use simple cognitive behavioural intervention first	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	(i.e., do not automatically assume tertiary care is needed)	Selectivity		
				
	e) Periodically reassess behaviours and their impact on	Clinical reasoning	History	
	mood, anxiety, cognitive function, and relationships	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
6	When assessing a patient presenting with a problem that has	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	defied diagnosis (e.g., arrhythmias without cardiac disease, an	Patient-centred Approach		
	electrolyte imbalance without drug use or renal impairment,			
	amenorrhea without pregnancy) include “complication of an			
	eating disorder” in the differential diagnosis.			

 











2020	97 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Elderly

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In the elderly patient taking multiple medications, avoid polypharmacy by:
 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Follow-up

 
•	monitoring side effects.

•	periodically reviewing medication (e.g., is the medication still indicated, is the dosage appropriate).

•	monitoring for interactions.

 

2	In the elderly patient, actively inquire about non-prescription medication use (e.g., herbal medicines, cough drops, over-the-counter drugs, vitamins).

 


Clinical Reasoning	History

 
3  In the elderly patient, screen for modifiable risk factors (e.g., visual   Clinical Reasoning	History
disturbance, impaired hearing) to promote safety and prolong	Hypothesis generation
independence.	

 

4	In the elderly patient, assess functional status to:

•	anticipate and discuss the eventual need for changes in the living environment.

•	ensure that social support is adequate.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	History

 
5	In older patients with diseases prone to atypical presentation, do not exclude these diseases without a thorough assessment (e.g., pneumonia, appendicitis, depression).

 

Selectivity	Hypothesis generation

Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

 
































2020	98 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Epistaxis

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	Through history and/or physical examination, assess the	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	hemodynamic stability of patients with epistaxis.		Diagnosis	
				
2	While attending to active nose bleeds, recognize and manage	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	excessive anxiety in the patient and accompanying family.	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
				
3	In a patient with an active or recent nosebleed, obtain a focused	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	history to identify possible etiologies (e.g., recent trauma, recent		Hypothesis generation	
	upper respiratory infection, medications).			
				
4	In a patient with an active or recent nosebleed,	Clinical Reasoning	Physical	
	a) Look for and identify anterior bleeding sites,			
	b) Stop the bleeding with appropriate methods.	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		Procedures Skills		
				
5	In a patient with ongoing or recurrent bleeding in spite of	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	treatment, consider a posterior bleeding site.			
				
6	In a patient with a nosebleed, obtain lab work only for specific	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Investigation	
	indications (e.g., unstable patient, suspicion of a bleeding diathesis,		Hypothesis generation	
	use of anticoagulation)			

 

7	In a patient with a nosebleed, provide thorough aftercare instructions (e.g., how to stop a subsequent nose bleed, when to return, humidification, etc.)

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Follow-up

 































2020	99 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Family Issues

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  Routinely ask about family issues to understand their impact on the	Patient-centred Approach	History
patient’s illness and the impact of the illness on the family.		

 

2	Ask about family issues

•	periodically

•	at important life-cycle points (e.g., when children move out, after the birth of a baby)

•	when faced with problems not resolving in spite of appropriate therapeutic interventions (e.g. medication compliance, fibromyalgia, hypertension)

 


Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation

Clinical Reasoning	History

 
















































2020	100 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Fatigue

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In all patients complaining of fatigue, include depression in the differential diagnosis.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
2	Ask about other constitutional symptoms as part of a systematic approach to rule out underlying medical causes in all patients complaining of fatigue.

 

Clinical Reasoning	History

 
3	Exclude adverse effects of medication as the cause in all patients	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	complaining of fatigue.		Diagnosis
			
4	Avoid early, routine investigations in patients with fatigue unless	Selectivity	Investigation
	specific indications for such investigations are present.		

 

5	Given patients with fatigue in whom other underlying disorders have been ruled out, assist them to place, in a therapeutic sense, the role of their life circumstances in their fatigue.

 


Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Communication

 
6	In patients whose fatigue has become chronic, manage supportively, while remaining vigilant for new diseases and illnesses.

 

Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 






































2020	101 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Fever

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In febrile infants 0-3 months old:

a)	Recognize the risk of occult bacteremia.

b)	Investigate thoroughly (e.g., blood cultures, urine, lumbar puncture +/- chest X-ray).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

Clinical Reasoning	Investigation

 
2	In a febrile patient with a viral infection, do NOT prescribe antibiotics.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
3  In a febrile patient requiring antibiotic therapy, prescribe the	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
appropriate antibiotic(s) according to likely causative organism(s)		
and local resistance patterns.		

 

4	Investigate patients with fever of unknown origin appropriately (e.g., with blood cultures, echocardiography, bone scans).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Investigation

 
5	In febrile patients, consider life-threatening infectious causes (e.g.,	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
	endocarditis, meningitis).		Diagnosis
			
6	Aggressively and immediately treat patients who have fever	Selectivity	Treatment
	resulting from serious causes before confirming the diagnosis,		
	whether these are infectious (e.g., febrile neutropenia, septic shock,		
	meningitis) or non-infectious (e.g., heat stroke, drug reaction,		
	malignant neuroleptic syndrome).		
			
7	In the febrile patient, consider causes of hyperthermia other than	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	infection (e.g., heat stroke, drug reaction, malignant neuroleptic		Diagnosis
	syndrome).		

 

8	In an elderly patient, be aware that no good correlation exists between the presence or absence of fever and the presence or absence of serious pathology.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 























2020	102 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Fractures

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  In a patient with multiple injuries, stabilize the patient (e.g., airway,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
breathing, and circulation, and life-threatening injuries) before		
dealing with any fractures.		

 

2	When examining patients with a fracture, assess neurovascular status and examine the joint above and below the injury.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Physical

 
	3	In patients with suspected fractures that are prone to have normal	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment
		X-ray findings (e.g., scaphoid fractures in wrist injuries, elbow			
		fracture, growth plate fracture in children, stress fractures), manage			
		according to your clinical suspicion, even if X-ray			
					
	4	In assessing elderly patients with an acute change in mobility (i.e.,	Clinical Reasoning		Investigation
		those who can no longer walk) and equivocal X-ray findings (e.g.,			
		no obvious fracture), investigate appropriately (e.g., with bone			
		scans, computed tomography) before excluding a fracture.			
					
	5	Identify and manage limb injuries that require urgent	Selectivity		Treatment
		immobilization and/or reduction in a timely manner.			Diagnosis
					
	6	In assessing patients with suspected fractures, provide analgesia that	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment
		is timely (i.e., before X-rays) and adequate (e.g., narcotic) analgesia.			
					
	7	In patients presenting with a fracture, look for and diagnose high-	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation
		risk complications (e.g., an open fracture, unstable cervical spine,			Diagnosis
		compartment syndrome).			
					
	8	Use clinical decision rules (e.g., Ottawa ankle rules, C-spine rules,	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Investigation
		and knee rules) to guide the use of X-ray examinations.			
					


Note: These key features do not include technical and or psychomotor skills such as casting, reduction of dislocations, etc. See Procedural Skills.
 






















2020	103 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Gastro-intestinal Bleed

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	In a patient with blood in the stools who is hemodynamically stable,	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	use history to differentiate upper vs. lower gastro-intestinal (GI)		History
	bleed as the investigation differs.		
			
2	In a patient with suspected blood in the stool, explore other possible	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	causes (e.g., beet ingestion, iron, Pepto-Bismol) before doing		History
	extensive investigation.		

 

3  Look for patients at higher risk for GI bleed (e.g., previous GI	Clinical Reasoning
bleed, intensive care unit admission, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory	
drugs, alcohol) so as to modify treatment to reduce risk of GI bleed	
(e.g cytoprotection).	

 


Hypothesis generation

History

 
4	In a patient with obvious GI bleeding, identify patients who may	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
	require timely treatment even though they are not yet in shock.			Diagnosis
				
5	In a stable patient with lower GI bleeding, look for serious causes	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
(e.g., malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease, ulcer, varices) even when there is an apparent obvious cause for the bleeding (e.g., do not attribute a rectal bleed to hemorrhoids or to oral anticoagulation).

 

6	In a patient with an upper GI bleed,

a)	Include variceal bleeding in your differential,
 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
b) Use history and physical examination to assess the likelihood  Clinical Reasoning	History
of a variceal bleed as its management differs.	Physical
	

 






























2020	104 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Gender Specific Issues

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	In the assessment of clinical problems that might present differently	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	in men and women, maintain an inclusive differential diagnosis that		
	allows for these differences (e.g., women with coronary artery		
	disease, depression in males).		
			
2	As part of caring for women with health concerns, assess the	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	possible contribution of domestic violence.		History
			
3	When men and women present with stress-related health concerns,	Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation
	assess the possible contribution of role-balancing issues (e.g., work-	Clinical Reasoning	History
	life balance or between partners).		
			
4	Establish office policies and practices to ensure patient comfort and	Professionalism	Physical
	choice, especially with sensitive examinations (e.g., positioning for		
	Pap, chaperones for genital/rectal exams).		

 

5	Interpret and apply research evidence for your patients in light of gender bias present in clinical studies (e.g., ASA use in women).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Professionalism

 







































2020	105 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Grief

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
1	In patients who have experienced a loss prepare them for	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	the types of reactions (e.g., emotional, physical, varying	Patient-centred Approach		
	length) they may have.			
2	In all grieving patients, especially those with a prolonged or			
	complex grief reaction:			
	a) Inquire about depression, suicidal ideation, self-	Clinical reasoning	History	
	medication, and alcohol and substance use			
			Hypothesis generation	
				
	b) Consider the requirement for additional	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	treatments or referral			
3	Recognize that grief reactions may vary based on the	Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation	
	individual’s context and experiences; life cycle and			
	developmental stages; and cultural and family contexts.			
4	In patients with presentations suggestive of grief reactions	Clinical reasoning	History	
	without obvious triggers look for triggers that may be unique	Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation	
	to each patient (e.g., death of a pet, loss of a job, reactions to			
	anniversary).			
5	In patients with unexplained or unresponsive physical or	Clinical reasoning	History	
	mental health concerns; alcohol or substance use; or		Hypothesis generation	
	functional or behavioural change ask about loss and/or grief			
	as possible contributing factors.			

 





































2020	106 | P a g e
 
			Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features
	Headache		
	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	Given a patient with a new-onset headache, differentiate benign	Selectivity	History
	from serious pathology through history and physical examination.		Physical
			
2	Given a patient with worrisome headache suggestive of serious	Selectivity	Investigation
	pathology (e.g., meningitis, tumour, temporal arteritis,	Clinical Reasoning
	subarachnoid bleed):		
a)	Do the appropriate work-up (e.g., biopsy, computed tomography [CT], lumbar puncture [LP], erythrocyte sedimentation rate).
 

b)	Make the diagnosis.

c)	Begin timely appropriate treatment (i.e., treat before a diagnosis of temporal arteritis or meningitis is confirmed).

d)	Do not assume that relief of symptoms with treatment excludes serious pathology.

 


Selectivity	Diagnosis

Clinical Reasoning

Selectivity	Treatment


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

 
	3	Given a patient with a history of chronic and/or relapsing headache	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		(e.g., tension, migraine, cluster, narcotic-induced, medication-			
		induced), treat appropriately, and avoid narcotic, barbiturate			
		dependence.			
					
	4	In a patient with a history of suspected subarachnoid bleed and a	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
		negative CT scan, do a lumbar puncture.	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
					
	5	In a patient suffering from acute migraine headache:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		a) Treat the episode.			
		b) Assess the ongoing treatment plan. (referral when necessary,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		take a stepwise approach).	Patient-centred Approach	Referral	
					

 
























2020	107 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Heart Failure

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	In patients with newly diagnosed heart failure determine the	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
	underlying cause, as treatment will differ.	Selectivity	Diagnosis
			
2	In an older patient presenting with fatigue include heart failure in	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
	your differential diagnosis.	Selectivity	
			
3	In a patient with symptoms suggestive of heart failure and a	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
	normal ejection fraction do not exclude this diagnosis.	Selectivity	Diagnosis
			
4	In patients with heart failure periodically assess functional	Clinical reasoning	History
	impairment using validated tools (e.g., New York Heart		Follow-up
	Association class, activities of daily living).		
5	To guide your management of a patient with an exacerbation of	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
	heart failure:		
a)	Identify possible triggers (e.g., infection, arrhythmia, adherence, diet, ischemia)
b) Consider comorbid conditions (e.g., renal failure)	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
	Selectivity	

 

6	When treating heart failure:

a)	Identify the type of heart failure (e.g., systolic, diastolic) because the treatment is different
b)	Appropriately prescribe medications to reduce mortality as well as treat the symptoms of congestive failure (e.g., diuretics, beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors, digoxin)

 


Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis

Selectivity

Clinical reasoning	Treatment

Selectivity	Follow-up

 
7	For patients with heart failure ensure you offer patient education and self-monitoring, such as routine self-weighing, healthy diet, medication adherence, smoking cessation, and exercise, to minimize exacerbations.
 

Clinical reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up

 
8	In a patient with heart failure recognize non-sustained response to	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis
	treatment as an indicator of worsening prognosis.	Selectivity	Follow-up
			
9	In a patient with heart failure and a progressively deteriorating		
	clinical course:		

a) Provide a realistic prognosis to patients and families	Clinical reasoning	Treatment
	Communication	
b) Introduce palliative care principles when appropriate for	Clinical reasoning	Treatment
the patient	Patient-centred Approach	
		

 














2020	108 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Hepatitis

		Key Feature	Skill		Phase	
						
	1	In a patient presenting with hepatitis symptoms and/or abnormal	Clinical Reasoning		History	
		liver function tests, take a focused history to assist in establishing			Hypothesis generation	
		the etiology (e.g., new drugs, alcohol, blood or body fluid exposure,				
		viral hepatitis).				
						
	2	In a patient with abnormal liver enzyme tests interpret the results to	Clinical Reasoning		Diagnosis	
		distinguish between obstructive and hepatocellular causes for				
		hepatitis as the subsequent investigation differs.				
						
	3	In a patient where an obstructive pattern has been identified,	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Investigation	
		a) Promptly arrange for imaging,				
		b) Refer for more definitive management in a timely manner.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
					Referral	
						
	4	In patients positive for Hepatitis B and/or C,	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
		a) Assess their infectiousness,				
					Investigation	
		b) Determine human immunodeficiency virus status.	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
					Investigation	
						
	5	In patients who are Hepatitis C antibody positive determine those	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
		patients who are chronically infected with Hepatitis C, because they			Investigation	
		are at greater risk for cirrhosis and hepatocellular cancer.				
						
	6	In patients who are chronically infected with Hepatitis C, refer for	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
		further assessment and possible treatment.			Referral	
						
	7	In patients who are at risk for Hepatitis B and/or Hepatitis C				
		exposure,	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
		a) Counsel about harm reduction strategies, risk of other blood			
		borne diseases,	Communication			
						
		b) Vaccinate accordingly.	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
						
	8	Offer post-exposure prophylaxis to patients who are exposed or	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
		possibly exposed to Hepatitis A or B.			Hypothesis generation	
						
	9	Periodically look for complications (e.g., cirrhosis, hepatocellular	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
		cancer) in patients with chronic viral hepatitis, especially hepatitis C			Follow-up	
		infection.				
						

 













2020	109 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Hyperlipidemia

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	Screen appropriate patients for hyperlipidemia.	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
			History
			
2	In all patients whose cardiovascular risk is being evaluated, include	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation
	the assessment of lipid status.		
			
3	When hyperlipidemia is present, take an appropriate history, and	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	examine and test the patient for modifiable causes (e.g., alcohol		History
	abuse, thyroid disease).		

 

4	Ensure that patients diagnosed with hyperlipidemia receive appropriate lifestyle and dietary advice. Periodically reassess compliance with this advice (especially in patients at overall low or moderate CV risk).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up

 
5	In treating hyperlipidemic patients, establish target lipid levels based on overall CV risk.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

 
6	In patients receiving medication for hyperlipidemia, periodically assess compliance with and side effects of treatment.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up

 






































2020	110 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Hypertension

		Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
					
	1	Screen for hypertension.	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
				Physical	
					
	2	Use correct technique and equipment to measure blood pressure.	Procedures Skills	Physical	
					
	3	Make the diagnosis of hypertension only after multiple BP readings	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
		(i.e., at different times and during different visits).			
					
	4	In patients with an established diagnosis of hypertension, assess and	Clinical Reasoning	History	
		re-evaluate periodically the overall cardiovascular risk and end-			
		organ complications:			
		a) Take an appropriate history.			
		b) Do the appropriate physical examination.	Clinical Reasoning	Physical	
		c) Arrange appropriate laboratory investigations.	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
					
	5	In appropriate patients with hypertension (e.g., young patients			
		requiring multiple medications, patients with an abdominal bruit,	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
		patients with hypokalemia in the absence of diuretics):			
		a) Suspect secondary hypertension.	Clinical Reasoning		
					
		b) Investigate appropriately.	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Investigation	
				Treatment	
					
	6	Suggest individualized lifestyle modifications to patients with	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		hypertension. (e.g., weight loss, exercise, limit alcohol consumption,	Patient-centred Approach		
		dietary changes).			
					
	7	In a patient diagnosed with hypertension, treat the hypertension	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		with appropriate pharmacologic therapy (e.g., consider the patient’s			
		age, concomitant disorders, other cardiovascular risk factors).			
					
	8	Given a patient with the signs and symptoms of hypertensive	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
		urgency or crisis, make the diagnosis and treat promptly.		Treatment	
					
	9	In all patients diagnosed with hypertension, assess response to	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up	
		treatment, medication compliance, and side effects at follow-up			
		visits.			
					

 

















2020	111 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Immigrants

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1	As part of the periodic health assessment of newly arrived immigrants:

	a) Assess vaccination status (as it may not be up to date).	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	b) Provide the necessary vaccinations to update their status.	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
				
2	As part of the ongoing care of immigrants, modify your approach	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	(when possible) as required by their cultural context (e.g., history	Communication	History	
	given only by husband, may refuse examination by a male physician,			
	language barriers).			
				
3	When dealing with a language barrier, make an effort to obtain the	Communication	History	
	history with the help of a medical interpreter and recognize the			
	limitations of all interpreters (e.g., different agendas, lack of medical			
	knowledge, something to hide).			
				
4	As part of the ongoing care of all immigrants (particularly those			
	who appear not to be coping):	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	a) Screen for depression (i.e., because they are at higher risk			
and frequently isolated).
 

b)	Inquire about a past history of abuse or torture.

c)	Assess patients for availability of resources for support (e.g., family, community organizations).

 


Clinical Reasoning	History

Clinical Reasoning	History

Patient-centred Approach

 
	5	In immigrants presenting with a new or ongoing medical condition,	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
		consider in the differential diagnosis infectious diseases acquired		
		before immigration (e.g., malaria, parasitic disease, tuberculosis).		
				
	6	As part of the ongoing care of all immigrants, inquire about the use	Clinical Reasoning	History
		of alternative healers, practices, and/or medications (e.g., ‘‘natural’’		
		or herbal medicines, spiritual healers, medications from different		
		countries, moxibustion).		
				

 





















2020	112 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Immunization

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  Do not delay immunizations unnecessarily (e.g., vaccinate a child	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
even if he or she has a runny nose).		

 

2	With parents who are hesitant to vaccinate their children, explore the reasons, and counsel them about the risks of deciding against routine immunization of their children.

 


Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Communication	History

 
3  Identify patients who will specifically benefit from immunization	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
(e.g., not just the elderly and children, but also the		Hypothesis generation
immunosuppressed, travellers, those with sickle cell anemia, and		
those at special risk for pneumonia and hepatitis A and B), and		
ensure it is offered.		

 

4  Clearly document immunizations given to your patients.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Professionalism

 
	5	In patients presenting with a suspected infectious disease, assess	Clinical Reasoning	History
		immunization status, as the differential diagnosis and consequent		Hypothesis generation
		treatment in unvaccinated patients is different.		
				
	6	In patients presenting with a suspected infectious disease, do not	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
		assume that a history of vaccination has provided protection against		
		disease (e.g., pertussis, rubella, diseases acquired while travelling).		
				

 

































2020	113 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


In Children

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	When evaluating children, generate a differential diagnosis that accounts for common medical problems, which may present differently in children (e.g., urinary tract infections, pneumonia, appendicitis, depression).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
2	As children, especially adolescents, generally present infrequently for medical care, take advantage of visits to ask about:

•	unverbalized problems (e.g., school performance)

•	social well-being (e.g., relationships, home, friends)

•	modifiable risk factors (e.g., exercise, diet)

•	risk behaviours (e.g., use of bike helmets and seatbelts).

 

Clinical Reasoning	History

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

 
3	At every opportunity, directly ask questions about risk behaviours	Clinical Reasoning	History
	(e.g., drug use, sex, smoking, driving) to promote harm reduction.	Communication	Treatment
			
4	In adolescents, ensure the confidentiality of the visit, and, when	Communication	Treatment
	appropriate, encourage open discussion with their caregivers about	Patient-centred Approach	
	specific problems (e.g., pregnancy, depression and suicide, bullying,		
	drug abuse).		

 

5  In assessing and treating children, use age-appropriate language.

 


Communication	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	History

 
	6	In assessing and treating children, obtain and share information	Communication	History
		with them directly (i.e., don’t just talk to the parents).	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
				
	7	When investigation is appropriate, do not limit it because it may be	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Treatment
		unpleasant for those involved (the child, parents, or health care		Investigation
		providers).		
				

 


























2020	114 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Infections

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1	In patients with a suspected infection,

a)	Determine the correct tools (e.g., swabs, culture/transport

medium), techniques, and protocols for cultures,	Clinical Reasoning		Investigation
b) Culture when appropriate (e.g., throat swabs/sore throat	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Investigation
guidelines).			


2	When considering treatment of an infection with an antibiotic, do so

		a) Judiciously (e.g., delayed treatment in otitis media with	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment
		comorbid illness in acute bronchitis),			
		b) Rationally (e.g., cost, guidelines, comorbidity, local resistance	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment
		patterns).			
					
	3	Treat infections empirically when appropriate (e.g., in life	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment
		threatening sepsis without culture report or confirmed diagnosis,			
		candida vaginitis post-antibiotic use).			
					
	4	Look for infection as a possible cause in a patient with an ill-defined	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation
		problem (e.g., confusion in the elderly, failure to thrive, unexplained			
		pain [necrotizing fasciitis, abdominal pain in children with			
		pneumonia]).			
					
	5	When a patient returns after an original diagnosis of a simple	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation
		infection and is deteriorating or not responding to treatment, think			
		about and look for more complex infection. (i.e., When a patient			
		returns complaining they are not getting better, don’t assume the			
		infection is just slow to resolve).			
					
	6	When treating infections with antibiotics use other therapies when	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment
		appropriate (e.g., aggressive fluid resuscitation in septic shock,			
		incision and drainage abscess, pain relief).			
					

 





















2020	115 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Infertility

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1  When a patient consults you with concerns about difficulties

becoming pregnant:

a) Take an appropriate history (e.g., ask how long they have	Clinical Reasoning	History	
been trying, assess menstrual history, determine coital frequency			
			
and timing) before providing reassurance or investigating further.			
b) Ensure follow-up at an appropriate time (e.g., after one to	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
two years of trying; in general, do not investigate infertility too			
early).			

 

2	In patients with fertility concerns, provide advice that accurately describes the likelihood of fertility.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
3	With older couples who have fertility concerns, refer earlier for investigation and treatment, as their likelihood of infertility is higher.

 

Clinical Reasoning Selectivity Hypothesis generation Referral

 
4	When choosing to investigate primary or secondary infertility, ensure that both partners are assessed.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
5	In couples who are likely infertile, discuss adoption when the time is right. (Remember that adoption often takes a long time.)

 

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning

 
6  In evaluating female patients with fertility concerns and menstrual   Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
abnormalities, look for specific signs and symptoms of certain	History
conditions (e.g., polycystic ovarian syndrome, hyperprolactinemia,	
thyroid disease) to direct further investigations (e.g., prolactin,	
thyroid-stimulating hormone, and luteal phase progesterone	
testing).	
	

 


























2020	116 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Insomnia

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	In patients presenting with sleep complaints take a careful history to	Clinical reasoning	History	
	distinguish insomnia from specific psychiatric diagnoses or other		Hypothesis generation	
	sleep-related diagnoses (e.g., sleep apnea, periodic limb movements,			
	restless legs syndrome, sleepwalking, sleep talking).			
2	When assessing patients with sleep complaints:			
	a) Obtain a collateral history from the bed partner or	Clinical reasoning	History	
	parents, if possible and appropriate			
	b) Assess the contribution of drugs (prescription, over-the-	Clinical reasoning	History	
	counter, recreational), caffeine, and alcohol		Hypothesis generation	
				
3	In all patients with insomnia:			
	a) Provide appropriate advice about sleep hygiene (e.g.,	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	limiting caffeine, naps, and screen time, following regular sleep			
	schedule, limiting bedroom activities to sleep and sex)	Patient-centred Approach		
	b) Offer other non-pharmacological options, such as	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	cognitive behavioural therapy			
				
4	When initiating sleep medications:			
	a) Educate the patient about risks and discuss these	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	medications’ time-limited effects	Communication		
	b) Use hypnotic medications judiciously (e.g., prescribe	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	only when disordered sleep has a severe impact on function, and	Selectivity		
	only with a clear indication)			
	c) Negotiate a reduction and cessation plan with the patient	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
		Communication		

 

5	When a patient with a long-term history of using sleep medication presents for renewal of their prescription reassess, educate, and discuss tapering and alternative therapies.

 


Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation

Professionalism	Treatment

 


























2020	117 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Ischemic Heart Disease

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	Given a specific clinical scenario in the office or emergency setting,	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
	diagnose presentations of ischemic heart disease (IHD) that are:		Diagnosis
	•	Classic		
	•	atypical (e.g., in women, those with diabetes, the young,		
		those at no risk).		
			
2	In a patient with modifiable risk factors for ischemic heart disease	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	(e.g., smoking, diabetes control, obesity), develop a plan in		
	collaboration with the patient to reduce her or his risk of developing		
	the disease.		

 

3	In a patient presenting with symptoms suggestive of ischemic heart disease but in whom the diagnosis may not be obvious, do not eliminate the diagnosis solely because of tests with limited specificity and sensitivity (e.g., electrocardiography, exercise stress testing, normal enzyme results).

 


Selectivity	Diagnosis

Clinical Reasoning	Investigation

 
4  In a patient with stable ischemic heart disease manage changes in	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
symptoms with self-initiated adjustment of medication (e.g.,		
nitroglycerin) and appropriate physician contact (e.g., office visits,		
phone calls, emergency department visits), depending on the nature		
an severity of symptoms.		

 

5	In the regular follow-up care of patients with established ischemic heart disease, specifically verify the following to detect complications and suboptimal control:

•	symptom control.

•	medication adherence.

•	impact on daily activities.

•	lifestyle modification

•	clinical screening (i.e., symptoms and signs of complications)

 


Clinical Reasoning	History

Patient-centred Approach	Diagnosis

 
6  In a person with diagnosed acute coronary syndrome (e.g.,	Selectivity	Treatment
cardiogenic shock, arrhythmia, pulmonary edema, acute myocardial		
infarction, unstable angina), manage the condition in an appropriate		
and timely manner.		
		

 














2020	118 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Joint Disorder

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1	In a patient presenting with joint pain, distinguish benign from serious pathology (e.g., sarcoma, septic joint):
	a) By taking pertinent history	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
		Clinical Reasoning	History
	b) By investigating in a timely and appropriate manner (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Investigation
	aspirate, blood work, an X-ray examination).		Diagnosis
			
2	In a patient presenting with non-specific musculoskeletal pain,	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	make a specific rheumatologic diagnosis when one is evident		
	through history, physical examination, and investigations. (e.g.,		
	gout, fibromyalgia, monoarthropathy vs. polyarthropathy).		
			
3	In a patient presenting with a monoarthropathy, rule out infectious	Selectivity	Diagnosis
	causes. (e.g., sexually transmitted diseases).	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
			
4	In patients presenting with musculoskeletal pain, include referred	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	and visceral sources of pain in the differential diagnosis. (e.g.,		
	angina, slipped capital epiphysis presenting as knee pain,		
	neuropathic pain).		
			
5	Clinically diagnose ligamentous injuries. Do NOT do an X-ray	Clinical Reasoning	Physical
	examination.	Procedures Skills	Diagnosis
			
6	In a patient presenting with joint pain, include systemic conditions	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	in the differential diagnosis (e.g., Wegener’s granulomatosis, lupus,		
	ulcerative colitis).		

 

7	In patients with a diagnosed rheumatologic condition:

a)	Actively inquire about pre-existing co-morbid conditions that may modify the treatment plan.
 


Clinical Reasoning	History

 
		b) Choose the appropriate treatment plan (e.g., no nonsteroidal	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		anti-inflammatory drugs in patients with renal failure or peptic			
		ulcer disease).			
					
	8	In assessing patients with a diagnosed rheumatologic condition,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		search for disease-related complications (e.g., iritis).			
					
	9	In patients experiencing musculoskeletal pain:			
		a) Actively inquire about the impact of the pain on daily life.	Patient-centred Approach	History	
					
		b) Treat with appropriate doses of analgesics.	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		c) Arrange for community resources and aids (e.g., splints,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		cane), if necessary.		Referral	
					
	10	In patients with rheumatoid arthritis, start treatment with disease-	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		modifying agents within an appropriate time interval.			
					

 




2020	119 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Lacerations

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  When managing a laceration, identify those that are more	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Diagnosis
complicated and may require special skills for repair (e.g., a second-		Physical
versus third-degree perineal tear, lip or eyelid lacerations involving		
margins, arterial lacerations).		

 

2	When managing a laceration, look for complications (e.g., flexor tendon lacerations, open fractures, bites to hands or face, neurovascular injury, foreign bodies) requiring more than simple suturing.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Physical

 
3	Given a deep or contaminated laceration, thoroughly clean with copious irrigation and debride when appropriate, before closing.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
4	Identify wounds at high risk of infection (e.g., puncture wounds,	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
	some bites, some contaminated wounds), and do not close them.			Treatment
				
5	When repairing lacerations in children, ensure appropriate	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment
	analgesia (e.g., topical anesthesia) and/or sedation (e.g., procedural			
	sedation) to avoid physical restraints.			

 

6	When repairing a laceration, allow for and take adequate time to use techniques that will achieve good cosmetic results (e.g., layer closure, revision if necessary, use of regional rather than local anesthesia).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
7	In treating a patient with a laceration:

a)	Ask about immunization status for tetanus.

b)	Immunize the patient appropriately.

 

Clinical Reasoning	History


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 



























2020	120 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Learning (Patients/Self)

Patients

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	As part of the ongoing care of children, ask parents about their children’s functioning in school to identify learning difficulties.

 


Clinical Reasoning	History

 
2	In children with school problems, take a thorough history to assist	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	in making a specific diagnosis of the problem (e.g., mental health		Hypothesis generation	
	problem, learning disability, hearing).			
				
3	When caring for a child with a learning disability, regularly assess	Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation	
	the impact of the learning disability on the child and the family.	Communication	Follow-up	
				
4	When caring for a child with a learning disability, ensure the patient	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	and family have access to available community resources to assist	Clinical Reasoning	Referral	
	them.			
				
5	To maximize the patient’s understanding and management of their			
	condition,	Patient-centred Approach	Diagnosis	
	a) Determine their willingness to receive information,			
		Communication	History	
	b) Match the complexity and amount of information provided	Communication Patient-	Treatment	
	with the patient’s ability to understand.	centred Approach		
				

Self Learning



		Key Feature	Skill	Phase
				
	6	Continuously assess your learning needs.	Professionalism	NA
				
	7	Effectively address your learning needs.	Professionalism	NA
			Selectivity	
				
	8	Incorporate your new knowledge into your practice.	Professionalism	NA
				

 



















2020	121 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Lifestyle

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In the ongoing care of patients, ask about behaviours that, if changed, can improve health (e.g., diet, exercise, alcohol use, substance use, safer sex, injury prevention (e.g., seatbelts and helmets).

 


Patient-centred Approach	History

Communication

 
	2	Before making recommendations about lifestyle modification,	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
		explore a patient’s readiness to change, as it may alter advice.		History
				
	3	Explore a person’s context (e.g., poverty) before making	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
		recommendations about lifestyle modification (e.g., healthy eating		History
		choices, exercise suggestions) so as to avoid making		
		recommendations incompatible with the patient’s context.		
				
	4	In the ongoing care of patients, periodically review their behaviours,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		recognizing that these may change.		Follow-up
				
	5	In the ongoing care of a patient, regularly reinforce advice about	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		lifestyle modification, whether or not the patient has instituted a		Follow-up
		change in behaviour.		
				

 






































2020	122 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Loss of Consciousness

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1	In an unconscious patient, assess ABC’s and resuscitate as needed.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Diagnosis
				Treatment
				
2	As part of the assessment of a patient who has lost consciousness,	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation
	obtain focused history from the patient or witnesses that would			History
	include duration, trauma, preexisting conditions, drugs, toxins,			
	medications and seizure activity.			
				
3	Examine unconscious patients for localizing and diagnostic signs	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation
	(e.g., ketone smell, liver flap, focal neurologic signs).			Physical
				
4	In patients with a loss of consciousness and a history of head	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation
	trauma, rule out intracranial bleeding.			Investigation
				
5	In patients with a loss of consciousness who are anticoagulated, rule	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation
	out intracranial bleeding.			Investigation
				
6	Assess and treat unconscious patients urgently for reversible	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
	conditions (e.g., shock, hypoxia, hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and			Treatment
	narcotic overdose).			

 

7	When following up patients who have lost consciousness, assess and advise regarding return to work, sporting, driving and recreational activities to minimize the possibility of injury to self or others in the event of a recurrence.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Communication	Treatment

 
8  In patients who have had a loss of consciousness without a clear	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
diagnosis, pursue investigations (e.g., rule out transient arythmia,		Investigation
seizure).		

 

9	When following up patients who have lost consciousness and where Clinical Reasoning there is potential for recurrent episodes, discuss specific preventive

and protective measures (e.g., position changes with orthostatic pressure changes).

 


Treatment Hypothesis generation

 
	10	In patients with loss of consciousness following head trauma, treat	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		and follow up according to current concussion guidelines.	Professionalism	Follow-up
				
	11	Advise authorities about appropriate patients with loss of	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		consciousness (e.g., regarding driving status).	Professionalism	
				

 














2020	123 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Loss of Weight

		Key Feature	Skill	Phase
				
	1	Pursue an underlying cause in a patient with unexplained weight	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		loss through history, physical examination (including weight) and		
		appropriate investigations.		
				
	2	Maintain an ongoing record of patients’ weights so as to accurately	Professionalism	Physical
		determine when true weight loss has occurred.		
				
	3	In patients with persistent weight loss of undiagnosed cause, follow-	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up
		up and reevaluate in a timely manner in order to decide whether		
		anything needs to be done.		
				

 
















































2020	124 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Low-back Pain

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In a patient with undefined acute low-back pain (LBP):

a)	Rule out serious causes (e.g., cauda equina syndrome, pyelonephritis, ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm, cancer) through appropriate history and physical examination.
 


Selectivity	Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

 
		b) Make a positive diagnosis of musculoskeletal pain (not a	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
		diagnosis of exclusion) through an appropriate history and physical			
		examination.			
					
	2	In a patient with confirmed mechanical low back pain:	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Investigation	
		a) Do not over-investigate in the acute phase.			
				Treatment	
		b) Advise the patient:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		•   that symptoms can evolve, and ensure adequate follow-up			
		care			
		•   that the prognosis is positive (i.e., the overwhelming			
		majority of cases will get better)			
					
	3	In a patient with mechanical low back pain, whether it is acute or	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		chronic, give appropriate analgesia and titrate it to the patient’s			
		pain.			
					
	4	Advise the patient with mechanical low back pain to return if new	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up	
		or progressive neurologic symptoms develop.		Treatment	
					
	5	In all patients with mechanical low back pain, discuss exercises and	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		posture strategies to prevent recurrences.	Patient-centred Approach		
					

 




























2020	125 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Meningitis

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	In the patient with a non-specific febrile illness, look for meningitis,	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
	especially in patients at higher risk (e.g., immuno-compromised		
	individuals, alcoholism, recent neurosurgery, head injury, recent		
	abdominal surgery, neonates, aboriginal groups, students living in		
	residence).		
			
2	When meningitis is suspected ensure a timely lumbar puncture.	Selectivity	Investigation
			
3	In the differentiation between viral and bacterial meningitis, adjust	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	the interpretation of the data in light of recent antibiotic use.		

 

4	For suspected bacterial meningitis, initiate urgent empiric IV antibiotic therapy (i.e., even before investigations are complete).

 


Selectivity	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning

 
5	Contact public health to ensure appropriate prophylaxis for family, friends and other contacts of each person with meningitis.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Professionalism

 










































2020	126 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Menopause

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In any woman of menopausal age, screen for symptoms of menopause and (e.g., hot flashes, changes in libido, vaginal dryness, incontinence, and psychological changes).

 


Clinical Reasoning	History

Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation

 
2	In a patient with typical symptoms suggestive of menopause, make	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	the diagnosis without ordering any tests. (This diagnosis is clinical			
	and tests are not required.)			
				
3	In a patient with atypical symptoms of menopause (e.g., weight loss,	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
	blood in stools), rule out serious pathology through the history and		History	
	selective use of tests, before diagnosing menopause.			
				
4	In a patient who presents with symptoms of menopause but whose	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	test results may not support the diagnosis, do not eliminate the			
	possibility of menopause solely because of these results.			
				
5	When a patient has contraindications to hormone-replacement	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	therapy (HRT), or chooses not to take HRT: Explore other	Patient-centred Approach		
	therapeutic options and recommend some appropriate choices			
				
6	In menopausal or perimenopausal women:	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	History	
	a) Specifically inquire about the use of natural or herbal			
	products.			
	b) Advise about potential effects and dangers (i.e., benefits and	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	problems) of natural or herbal products and interactions.			

 

7	In a menopausal or perimenopausal women, provide counselling about preventive health measures (e.g., osteoporosis testing, mammography).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
8	Establish by history a patient’s hormone-replacement therapy risk/benefit status.

 

Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	History

 






















2020	127 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Mental Competency

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1  In a patient with a diagnosis that may increase the likelihood of			
cognitive and/or functional impairment (e.g., dementia, stroke,			
severe mental illness, head injury):			
a) Assess the patient’s level of competence in the context of	Clinical reasoning	History	
the decision(s) that the patient needs to make, recognizing that			
	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
higher-risk decisions require higher cognitive capacity			
			
b) Explain the purpose of the assessment and attempt to	Communication	History	
gain permission before you begin the assessment	Professionalism	Investigation	
c) Include other professionals when appropriate	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	Professionalism	Referral	


2	In an otherwise well patient with subtle changes in function (e.g., family concerns, medication errors, repetitive questions, decline in

	personal hygiene):	Clinical reasoning	Physical	
	a) Perform an appropriate assessment of cognitive and			
		Communication	Investigation	
	functional abilities			
				
	b) Refer for further assessment when necessary	Clinical reasoning	Referral	
		Selectivity		
				
3	When a patient is making high-stakes care decisions (e.g.,	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	surgery/no surgery, resuscitation status) think about the need to		Treatment	
	assess their decision-making ability.			
				
4	When capacity assessment is required, actively assess the patient’s	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
	ability to understand, appreciate, reason, and express a choice.		Investigation	
				
5	When impaired decision-making ability is identified, attempt to	Clinical reasoning	History	
	establish severity, reversibility, and duration in order to plan		Diagnosis	
	treatment and regular reassessment.			
				
6	When a patient refuses to participate in capacity assessment:	Communication	Treatment	
	a) Document their refusal			
	b) Continue to engage in the provision of safe care that is	Professionalism	Treatment	
	acceptable to the patient			

 
c)	Revisit the assessment when indicated

d)	Pursue the need for a substitute decision maker when

necessary

 

Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Selectivity	Follow-up

Clinical reasoning	Follow-up

Selectivity	Treatment

 










2020	128 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

 




7	When involuntary treatment is indicated:

a)	Initiate the certification process

b)	Collaborate with colleagues/family regarding the procedures required

c)	Document and communicate according to legal requirements

d)	Help the patient and family understand why this is

necessary
 






Communication Treatment Professionalism

Communication Treatment Patient-centred Approach

Communication Treatment Professionalism

Communication Treatment Patient-centred Approach

 
e) Clarify your continuing role in the care of the patient

 

Communication Follow-up Professionalism

 
8  When involuntary interventions that impact autonomy are required  Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
(e.g., loss of driver’s licence) include management of the emotional	
impact on the patient and possible effects on the physician-patient	
relationship as parts of the treatment plan.	
	

 







































2020	129 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Multiple Medical Problems

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In all patients presenting with multiple medical concerns (e.g., complaints, problems, diagnoses), take an appropriate history to determine the primary reason for the consultation.

 


Selectivity	History

Clinical Reasoning

 
2  In all patients presenting with multiple medical concerns, prioritize  Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
problems appropriately to develop an agenda that both you and the	
patient can agree upon (i.e., determine common ground).	

 

3	In a patient with multiple medical complaints (and/or visits), consider underlying depression, anxiety, or abuse (e.g., physical, medication, or drug abuse) as the cause of the symptoms, while continuing to search for other organic pathology.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
4	Given a patient with multiple defined medical conditions,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	periodically assess for secondary depression, as they are particularly		History
	at risk for it.		
			
5	Periodically re-address and re-evaluate the management of patients	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	with multiple medical problems in order to:		Follow-up

•	simplify their management (pharmacologic and other)

•	limit polypharmacy

•	minimize possible drug interactions

•	update therapeutic choices (e.g., because of changing guidelines or the patient’s situation)

 

6	In patients with multiple medical problems and recurrent visits for unchanging symptoms, set limits for consultations when appropriate (e.g., limit the duration and frequency of visits).

 


Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Professionalism	Follow-up

 



























2020	130 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Neck Pain

		Key Feature	Skill		Phase
					
	1	In patients with non-traumatic neck pain, use a focused history,	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
		physical examination and appropriate investigations to distinguish			Diagnosis
		serious, non-musculoskeletal causes (e.g., lymphoma, carotid			
		dissection), including those referred to the neck (e.g., myocardial			
		infarction, pseudotumour cerebri) from other non-serious causes.			
					
	2	In patients with non-traumatic neck pain, distinguish by history	Clinical Reasoning		History
		and physical examination, those attributable to nerve or spinal cord			Physical
		compression from those due to other mechanical causes (e.g.,			
		muscular).			
					
	3	Use a multi-modal (e.g., physiotherapy, chiropractic, acupuncture,	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment
		massage) approach to treatment of patients with chronic neck pain			
		(e.g., degenerative disc disease +/- soft neuro signs).			
					
	4	In patients with neck pain following injury, distinguish by history	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Diagnosis
		and physical examination, those requiring an X-ray to rule out a			Investigation
		fracture from those who do not require an X-ray (e.g., current			
		guideline/C-spine rules).			
					
	5	When reviewing neck X-rays of patients with traumatic neck pain,	Clinical Reasoning		Diagnosis
		be sure all vertebrae are visualized adequately.			Investigation
					

 


































2020	131 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Newborn

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  When examining a newborn, systematically look for subtle	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
congenital anomalies (e.g., ear abnormalities, sacral dimple) as they		Physical
may be associated with other anomalies and genetic syndromes.		


2	In a newborn, where a concern has been raised by a caregiver (parent, nurse),

	a) Think about sepsis, and	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	b) Look for signs of sepsis, as the presentation can be subtle (i.e.	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Physical
	not the same as in adults, non-specific, feeding difficulties,		History
	respiratory changes)		
	c) Make a provisional diagnosis of sepsis.	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
			
3	Resuscitate newborns according to current guidelines.	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		Procedures Skills	
			
4	Maintain neonatal resuscitation skills if appropriate for your	Professionalism	Treatment
	practice.		

 

5	When a parent elects to bottle feed, support their decision in a non-judgemental manner.

 


Professionalism Treatment Patient-centred Approach

 
	6	In caring for a newborn ensure repeat evaluations for abnormalities	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up	
		that may become apparent over time (e.g., hips, heart, hearing).		Physical	
					
	7	When discharging a newborn from hospital,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		a) Advise parent(s) of warning signs of serious or impending			
		illness, and	Communication	Follow-up	
		b) Develop a plan with them to access appropriate care should a	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up	
		concern arise.	Patient-centred Approach		
					

 
























2020	132 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Obesity

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  In patients who appear to be obese, make the diagnosis of obesity	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
using a clear definition (i.e., currently body mass index) and inform		
them of the diagnosis.		

 

2	In all obese patients, assess for treatable co-morbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, coronary artery disease, sleep apnea, and osteoarthritis, as these are more likely to be present.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
3	In patients diagnosed with obesity who have confirmed normal thyroid function, avoid repeated thyroid-stimulating hormone testing.

 

Clinical Reasoning Selectivity Investigation Treatment

 
	4	In obese patients, inquire about the effect of obesity on the patient’s	Patient-centred Approach	History
		personal and social life to better understand its impact on the		
		patient.		
				
	5	In a patient diagnosed with obesity, establish the patient’s readiness	Patient-centred Approach	History
		to make changes necessary to lose weight, as advice will differ, and		Follow-up
		reassess this readiness periodically.		
				
	6	Advise the obese patient seeking treatment that effective	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		management will require appropriate diet, adequate exercise, and		
		support (independent of any medical or surgical treatment), and		
		facilitate the patient’s access to these as needed and as possible.		
				
	7	As part of preventing childhood obesity, advise parents of healthy	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		activity levels for their children.		
				
	8	In managing childhood obesity, challenge parents to make	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		appropriate family-wide changes in diet and exercise, and to avoid	Communication	
		counterproductive interventions (e.g., berating or singling out the		
		obese child).		
				

 























2020	133 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Osteoporosis

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	Assess osteoporosis risk of all adult patients as part of their periodic	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	health examination.		Diagnosis
			
2	Use bone mineral density testing judiciously (e.g., don’t test	Selectivity	Investigation
	everybody, follow a guideline).	Professionalism	Follow-up
			
3	Counsel all patients about primary prevention of osteoporosis (i.e.,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	dietary calcium, physical activity, smoking cessation), especially	Communication	
	those at higher risk (e.g., young female athletes, patients with eating		
	disorders).		

 

4	In menopausal or peri-menopausal women, provide advice about fracture prevention that includes improving their physical fitness, reducing alcohol, smoking cessation, risks of physical abuse, and environmental factors that may contribute to falls (e.g., don’t stop at suggesting calcium and vitamin D).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Communication	Hypothesis generation

 
	5	In patients with osteoporosis, avoid prescribing medications that	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		may increase the risk of falls.		Treatment
				
	6	Provide advice and counseling about fracture prevention to older	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		men, as they too are at risk for osteoporosis.		Treatment
				
	7	Treat patients with established osteoporosis regardless of their	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		gender (e.g., use bisphosphonates in men).		Treatment
				

 































2020	134 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Pain

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	In a patient presenting with acute pain provide analgesia while	Selectivity	Treatment
	seeking a diagnosis.		
2	When assessing a patient with pain take a detailed history to	Clinical reasoning	History
	recognize clinical patterns (diagnostic discerning characteristics)		Hypothesis
	to inform diagnosis (e.g., neuropathic, vascular, muscular, visceral		
	pain).			
3	In a patient presenting with pain without a clear diagnosis:		
	a)	Include life-threatening conditions in your differential	Selectivity	Hypothesis
	diagnosis	Clinical reasoning	
	b)	Investigate appropriately and in a timely manner	Selectivity	Investigation
			Clinical reasoning	


4	When there is a concern about drug-seeking behaviour in a patient with pain:

	a) Maintain your therapeutic relationship (e.g., be	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	empathic, avoid stereotyping, manage frustration)	Professionalism	Follow-up
	b) Do not attribute the presentation to drug-seeking	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
	without first considering an appropriately broad differential	Selectivity		
	diagnosis			
5  When treating pain with narcotics:			
	a) Dose appropriately considering narcotic naïveté and	Clinical reasoning	Treatment
	renal function			
	b) Consider addiction risk	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
			Treatment
	c) Consider variable and potentially dangerous metabolic	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
	responses (e.g., codeine, especially in pregnant and		Treatment
	breastfeeding women; sudden removal of a painful stimulus)			
6  In a patient whose pain is not resolving or following the	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
	anticipated course, regularly re-evaluate (e.g., diagnosis,		Follow-up
	complications, medication choices, drug diversion).			
7	When prescribing medication for pain inform the patient not to	Clinical reasoning	Treatment
	use over-the-counter products that contain the same drug or			
	drugs from the same class (e.g., acetaminophen, NSAIDs)			
8	When treating a patient with pain appropriately use non-	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	pharmacologic treatments and self-management strategies to	Clinical reasoning		
	control pain and optimize function.			
9  In a patient where acute pain has become chronic:			
	a) Recognize the transition	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis
	b) Readdress the treatment plan and your patient’s	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	expectations appropriately	Communication		

 











2020	135 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Palliative Care

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In all patients with terminal illnesses (e.g., end-stage congestive heart failure or renal disease), use the principles of palliative care to address symptoms (i.e.., do not limit the use of palliative care to cancer patients).

 


Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning

 
	2	In patients requiring palliative care, provide support through self,	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
		other related disciplines, or community agencies, depending on			
		patient needs (i.e.., use a team approach when necessary).			
					
	3	In patients approaching the end of life:			
		a) Identify the individual issues important to the patient,	Patient-centred Approach	History	
		including physical issues (e.g., dyspnea, pain, constipation, nausea),			
		emotional issues, social issues (e.g., guardianship, wills, finances),	Clinical Reasoning		
					
		and spiritual issues.			
		b) Attempt to address the issues identified as important to the	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
		patient.	Clinical Reasoning		
					
	4	In patients with pain, manage it (e.g., adjust dosages, change	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		analgesics) proactively through:		Follow-up	
		•   frequent reassessments			
		•   monitoring of drug side effects (e.g., nausea, constipation,			
		cognitive impairment)			
					
	5	In patients diagnosed with a terminal illness, identify and repeatedly	Patient-centred Approach	History	
		clarify wishes about end-of-life issues (e.g., wishes for treatment of	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		infections, intubation, dying at home)			
					

 




























2020	136 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Parkinsonism

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	In patients with suspected Parkinson’s disease, accurately	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	distinguish idiopathic Parkinson’s disease from atypical Parkinson’s		
	disease (e.g., disease at a young age, drug-related disease), as		
	treatment differs.		
			
2	In the care of all patients with Parkinson’s disease, involve other	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	health care professionals to enhance the patient’s functional status.	Professionalism	Referral
			
3	In an elderly patient with a deterioration in functional status, look	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	for and recognize Parkinson’s disease when it is present, as it is a		Diagnosis
	potentially reversible contribution to the deterioration.		
			
4	In a patient with a tremor, do an appropriate physical examination	Clinical Reasoning	Physical
	(e.g., observation, use of techniques to enhance the tremor) to		

distinguish the resting tremor of parkinsonism from other (e.g., essential) tremors.

 

5	As part of the management of patients with Parkinson’s disease, identify anticipated side effects of medications, especially those with which you are unfamiliar.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Professionalism

 
6  As part of the ongoing follow-up care of patients with Parkinson’s	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
disease:		Follow-up

•	Assess functional status

•	Monitor them for medication side effects

•	Look for other problems (e.g., depression, dementia, falls, constipation), as they are more common

 





























2020	137 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Periodic Health Assessment/Screening


Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	Do a periodic health assessment in a proactive or opportunistic manner (i.e., address health maintenance even when patients present with unrelated concerns).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
2	In any given patient, selectively adapt the periodic health	Selectivity	Investigation	
	examination to that patient’s specific circumstances (i.e., adhere to	Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation	
	inclusion and exclusion criteria of each manoeuvre/intervention,			
	such as the criteria for mammography and prostate-specific antigen			
	[PSA] testing).			
3  In a patient requesting a test (e.g., PSA testing, mammography)			
	that may or may not be recommended:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	a) Inform the patient about limitations of the screening test			
	(i.e., sensitivity and specificity).		Investigation	
				
	b) Counsel the patient about the implications of proceeding	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment Investigation	
	with the test.	Patient-centred Approach		
4	Keep up to date with new recommendations for the periodic health	Professionalism	Treatment	
	examination, and critically evaluate their usefulness and application		Diagnosis	
	to your practice.			

 





































2020	138 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Personality Disorder

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
1	When assessing a patient with personality traits or behaviours that impair			
	interactions and/or function:	Clinical reasoning	History	
	a) Distinguish between isolated or intermittent manifestations and			
	established, habitual patterns of behaviour	Patient-centred Approach		
				
	b) Rule out pharmacologic or underlying medical causes (e.g.,	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	substance use, brain tumour)	Selectivity		
	c) Do not label the patient with a personality disorder prematurely	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
	or without clear justification (i.e., personality traits are not a disorder)			
2	For any patient with a personality disorder or personality traits that impair			
	interpersonal interaction:	Communication	Treatment	
	a) Adapt your communication style to optimize the development of			
	a therapeutic relationship to provide effective care	Patient-centred Approach		
				
	b) Determine the impact of the patient’s personality disorder on	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	their ability to access health care	Communication		
3	When providing care for a patient with a personality disorder reflect on,	Professionalism	Treatment	
	acknowledge, and manage your own emotional responses in order to provide			
	empathetic and patient-centred care.	Patient-centred Approach		

4	When caring for a patient with a personality disorder or with difficult behaviours or requests:
	a) Address the behaviour in a direct but non-threatening manner	Communication	Treatment	
	b) Co-create realistic goals and expectations with the patient	Professionalism		
		Communication	Treatment	
		Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
	c) Establish and maintain clear boundaries and limits (e.g.,	Communication	Treatment	
	appointment length, drug prescribing, accessibility) and communicate these	Professionalism	Follow-up	
	to your team			
	d) Continue the therapeutic relationship with the patient unless	Professionalism	Treatment	
	there is risk to you or others	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
5	In a patient already diagnosed with personality disorder look for medical	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	and other psychiatric diagnoses when the patient presents for assessment of			
	new or changed symptoms. (Patients with personality disorders develop			
	medical and psychiatric conditions, too.)			
6	When seeing a patient whom others have previously identified as having a	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
	personality disorder evaluate the patient yourself because the diagnosis may	Patient-centred Approach		
	be wrong, and the label has significant repercussions.			

 
















2020	139 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Pneumonia

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In a patient who presents without the classic respiratory signs and symptoms (e.g., deterioration, delirium, abdominal pain), include pneumonia in the differential diagnosis.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
2	In a patient with signs and symptoms of pneumonia, do not rule out	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
	the diagnosis on the basis of a normal chest X-ray film (e.g., consider			Hypothesis generation	
	dehydration, neutropenia, human immunodeficiency virus [HIV]				
	infection).				
					
3	In a patient with a diagnosis of pneumonia, assess the risks for unusual	Clinical Reasoning		History	
	pathogens (e.g., a history of tuberculosis, exposure to birds, travel,			Hypothesis generation	
	HIV infection, aspiration).				
					
4	In patients with pre-existing medical problems (e.g., asthma, diabetes,				
	congestive heart failure) and a new diagnosis of pneumonia:				
	a) Treat both problems concurrently (e.g., with prednisone plus	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
	antibiotics).				
					
	b) Adjust the treatment plan for pneumonia, taking into account	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
	the concomitant medical problems (e.g., be aware of any drug			Hypothesis generation	
	interactions, such as that between warfarin [Coumadin] and				
	antibiotics).				
					
5	Identify patients, through history-taking, physical examination, and	Selectivity		History	
	testing, who are at high risk for a complicated course of pneumonia			Diagnosis	
	and would benefit from hospitalization, even though clinically they				
	may appear stable.				
					
6	In the patient with pneumonia and early signs of respiratory distress,	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
	assess, and reassess periodically, the need for respiratory support				
(bilevel positive airway pressure, continuous positive airway pressure, intubation) (i.e., look for the need before decompensation occurs).

 

7	For a patient with a confirmed diagnosis of pneumonia, make rational antibiotic choices (e.g., outpatient + healthy = first-line antibiotics; avoid the routine use of “big guns”).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Professionalism

 



















2020	140 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

 




8	In a patient who is receiving treatment for pneumonia and is not responding:

a) Revise the diagnosis (e.g., identify other or contributing causes, Clinical Reasoning such as cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or

bronchospasm), consider atypical pathogens (e.g., Pneumocystis carinii,TB, and diagnose complications (e.g., empyema, pneumothorax).
 







Hypothesis generation Diagnosis

 
b) Modify the therapy appropriately (e.g., change antibiotics).	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		Diagnosis
		
9  Identify patients (e.g., the elderly, nursing home residents,	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Treatment
debilitated patients) who would benefit from immunization or		
other treatments (e.g., flu vaccine, Pneumovax, ribavarine) to reduce		
the incidence of pneumonia.		

 

10	In patients with a diagnosis of pneumonia, ensure appropriate follow-up care (e.g., patient education, repeat chest X-ray examination, instructions to return if the condition worsens).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up

 
11  In patients with a confirmed diagnosis of pneumonia, arrange	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up
contact tracing when appropriate (e.g., in those with TB, nursing		Referral
home residents, those with legionnaires’ disease).		
		

 



































2020	141 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Poisoning

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	As part of well-child care, discuss preventing and treating poisoning with parents (e.g., “child-proofing”, poison control number).

 


Communication Treatment Clinical Reasoning

 
2	In intentional poisonings (overdose) think about multi-toxin ingestion.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
3	When assessing a patient with a potentially toxic ingestion, take a	Clinical Reasoning	History
	careful history about the timing and nature of the ingestion.		
			
4	When assessing a patient with a potential poisoning, do a focused	Clinical Reasoning	Physical
	physical examination to look for the signs of toxidromes.		

 

5	When assessing a patient exposed (contact or ingestion) to a substance, clarify the consequences of the exposure (e.g., don’t assume it is non-toxic, call poison control).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Treatment

 
	6	When managing a toxic ingestion, utilize poison control protocols	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		that are current.	Professionalism		
					
	7	When managing a patient with a poisoning,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		a) Assess ABC's,			
				Diagnosis	
		b) Manage ABC's,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		c) Regularly reassess the patient’s ABC’s (i.e., do not focus on	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		antidotes and decontamination while ignoring the effect of the		Treatment	
		poisoning on the patient).			
					

 





























2020	142 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Pregnancy

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	In a patient who is considering pregnancy:	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Identify risk factors for complications.			
		Patient-centred Approach	Diagnosis	
	b) Recommend appropriate changes (e.g., folic acid intake,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	smoking cessation, medication changes).	Patient-centred Approach		
				
2	In a female or male patient who is sexually active, who is	Communication	Treatment	
	considering sexual activity, or who has the potential to conceive or	Patient-centred Approach		
	engender a pregnancy, use available encounters to educate about			
	fertility.			
				
3	In a patient with suspected or confirmed pregnancy, establish the	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	desirability of the pregnancy.	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	


4	In a patient presenting with a confirmed pregnancy for the first encounter:
		a) Assess maternal risk factors (medical and social).	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
			Patient-centred Approach	History	
		b) Establish accurate dates.	Clinical Reasoning		Diagnosis	
		c) Advise the patient about ongoing care.	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
						
	5	In pregnant patients:	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
		a) Identify those at high risk (e.g., teens, domestic violence				
		victims, single parents, drug abusers, impoverished women).			History	
		b) Refer these high-risk patients to appropriate resources	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
		throughout the antepartum and postpartum periods.			Referral	
						
	6	In at-risk pregnant patients (e.g., women with human	Selectivity		Treatment	
		immunodeficiency virus infection, intravenous drug users, and	Clinical Reasoning			
		diabetic or epileptic women), modify antenatal care appropriately.				
						
	7	In a pregnant patient presenting with features of an antenatal				
		complication (e.g., premature rupture of membranes, hypertension,				
		bleeding):	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
		a) Establish the diagnosis.				
					Diagnosis	
						
		b) Manage the complication appropriately.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
						
	8	In a patient presenting with dystocia (prolonged dilatation, failure				
		of descent):	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
		a) Diagnose the problem.				
					Diagnosis	
		b) Intervene appropriately.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
						

 







2020	143 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features





9	In a patient with clinical evidence of complications in labour (e.g., abruption, uterine rupture, shoulder dystocia, non-reassuring fetal

	monitoring):	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Diagnose the complication.				
				Diagnosis	
					
	b) Manage the complication appropriately.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
					
10	In the patient presenting with clinical evidence of a postpartum				
	complication (e.g., delayed or immediate bleeding, infection):	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Diagnose the problem (e.g., unrecognized retained placenta,				
	endometritis, cervical laceration).			Diagnosis	
					
	b) Manage the problem appropriately.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
					
11	In pregnant or postpartum patients, identify postpartum depression	Selectivity		Hypothesis generation	
	by screening for risk factors, monitoring patients at risk, and	Clinical Reasoning		Diagnosis	
	distinguishing postpartum depression from the “blues.’’				

 

12	In a breast-feeding woman, screen for and characterize dysfunctional breast-feeding (e.g., poor latch, poor production, poor letdown).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Patient-centred Approach	History

 






































2020	144 | P a g e
 
		Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features
	Prostate		
	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	Appropriately identify patients requiring prostate cancer screening.	Selectivity	Diagnosis
			History
			
2	In a patient suitable for prostate cancer screening, use and interpret	Selectivity	Investigation
	tests (e.g., prostate-specific antigen testing, digital rectal	Patient-centred Approach	Diagnosis
	examination [DRE], ultrasonography) in an		
	individualized/sequential manner to identify potential cases.		
			
3	In patients with prostate cancer, actively search out the	Patient-centred Approach	History
	psychological impact of the diagnosis and treatment modality.	Communication	


4	In patients with prostate cancer, considering a specific treatment option (e.g., surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, hormonal
	treatment, no treatment):	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	a) Advise about the risks and benefits of treatment.			
		Patient-centred Approach		
				
	b) Monitor patients for complications following treatment.	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
			Follow-up	
				
5	In patients with prostate cancer, actively ask about symptoms of	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	local recurrence or distant spread.		Hypothesis generation	
				
6	Given a suspicion of benign prostatic hypertrophy, diagnose it using	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	appropriate history, physical examination, and investigations.			

 

7	In patients presenting with specific or non-specific urinary symptoms:
a)	Identify the possibility of prostatitis.

b)	Interpret investigations (e.g., urinalysis, urine culture-and-sensitivity testing, Digital Rectal Exam, swab testing, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay) appropriately.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Investigation

 

























2020	145 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Rape/Sexual Assault

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	Provide comprehensive care to all patients who have been sexually assaulted, regardless of their decision to proceed with evidence collection or not.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Professionalism

 
2  Apply the same principles of managing sexual assault in the acute	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
setting to other ambulatory settings (i.e. medical assessment,		
pregnancy prevention, STI screening/treatment/prophylaxis,		
counselling).		

 

3	Limit documentation in sexual assault patients to observations and other necessary medical information (i.e., avoid recording hearsay information).

 


Clinical Reasoning	History

Professionalism

 
	4	In addition to other post-exposure prophylactic measures taken,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		assess the need for human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B		Diagnosis
		prophylaxis in patients who have been sexually assaulted.		
				
	5	Offer counselling to all patients affected by sexual assault, whether	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		they are victims, family members, friends, or partners; do not		
		discount the impact of sexual assault on all of these people.		
				
	6	Revisit the need for counselling in patients affected by sexual	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		assault.		Follow-up
				
	7	Enquire about undisclosed sexual assault when seeing patients who	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		have symptoms such as depression, anxiety, and somatization.		History
				

 






























2020	146 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Rash

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In a patient with a new rash:

a)	Take a focused history and do an appropriate skin examination
 


Clinical reasoning	History

Selectivity	Physical

 
b)	If the diagnosis remains unclear obtain a more detailed history and examination, including the entire mucocutaneous system and other body systems as indicated

 

Clinical reasoning	History

Selectivity	Physical

 
2	When assessing a patient with a rash look for and recognize common patterns to aid diagnosis.

 

Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis

 
3	Use appropriate terminology with respect to lesion type, shape, arrangement, and distribution to facilitate communication and documentation

 

Communication Physical Follow-up

 
4	In an unwell patient presenting with a rash:

a)	Identify potential life-threatening systemic conditions (e.g., meningococcal septicemia, necrotizing fasciitis, toxic shock, Stevens-Johnson syndrome)
 

Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis

Selectivity	Diagnosis

 
b) Initiate treatment and/or urgent/emergent referral	Selectivity	Treatment
		Referral
		
5  In a patient with a persisting undiagnosed rash:	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
a)	Consider a systemic disorder (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, diabetes, celiac)
 

b)	Investigate appropriately (e.g., scraping, culture, biopsy, lab

work)

c)	Pursue further investigations and/or refer as indicated regardless of negative results

 


Clinical reasoning	Investigation

Procedure skills

Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis

Follow-up

 

6  In all patients with a persistent or recurrent rash explore the	Patient-centred Approach	History
functional and emotional aspects of that disorder, recognizing that		Follow-up
what looks like a minor condition may have a profound impact.		

 

7	7  In a patient with a persistent or recurrent rash explore issues of:

•	Exposure to skin irritants or allergens

•	Adherence to the treatment plan
 


Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis

Patient-centred Approach

 
•	Use of confounding medications and treatments (e.g., topical anesthetics, topical steroids, home remedies)

 

8	In a patient with an infectious rash:

a)	Manage contagion risk

b)	Ensure that public health bodies are informed when indicated

 


Clinical reasoning	Treatment

Selectivity

Clinical reasoning	Follow-up

Professionalism

 




2020	147 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Red Eye

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  In addressing eye complaints, always assess visual acuity using	Clinical Reasoning	History
history, physical examination, or the Snellen chart, as appropriate.		Physical


2	In a patient with a red eye, distinguish between serious causes (e.g., keratitis, glaucoma, perforation, temporal arteritis) and non-serious causes (i.e., do not assume all red eyes are caused by conjunctivitis):

a)	Take an appropriate history (e.g., photophobia, changes in

vision, history of trauma).	Clinical Reasoning	History	
			
b) Do a focused physical examination (e.g., pupil size, and	Clinical Reasoning	Physical	
visual acuity, slit lamp, fluorescein).			

 
c)	Do appropriate investigations (e.g., erythrocyte sedimentation rate measurement, tonometry).

d)	Refer the patient appropriately (if unsure of the diagnosis or if further work-up is needed).

 

Clinical Reasoning	Investigation


Clinical Reasoning	Referral

 
3	In patients presenting with an ocular foreign body sensation,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	correctly diagnose an intraocular foreign body by clarifying the		Diagnosis
	mechanism of injury (e.g., high speed, metal on metal, no glasses)		
	and investigating (e.g., with computed tomography, X-ray		
	examination) when necessary.		
			
4	In patients presenting with an ocular foreign body sensation, evert	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	the eyelids to rule out the presence of a conjunctival foreign body.	Procedures Skills	Physical
			
5	In neonates with conjunctivitis (not just blocked lacrimal glands or	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	‘‘gunky’’ eyes), look for a systemic cause and treat it appropriately		Treatment
	(i.e., with antibiotics).		
			
6	In patients with conjunctivitis, distinguish by history and physical	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	examination between allergic and infectious causes (viral or		History
	bacterial).		
			
7	In patients who have bacterial conjunctivitis and use contact lenses,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	provide treatment with antibiotics that cover for Pseudomonas.		
			
8	Use steroid treatment only when indicated (e.g., to treat iritis; avoid	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	with keratitis and conjunctivitis).		

 

9	In patients with iritis, consider and look for underlying systemic causes (e.g., Crohn’s disease, lupus, ankylosing spondylitis).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 










2020	148 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Renal Failure

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
1	In patients with chronic renal failure ensure they are aware of their	Communication	Treatment	
	diagnosis and its implications.	Patient-centred Approach		
2	In any patient mitigate the risks of precipitating renal failure when	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis	
	investigation and treatment combinations are likely to be harmful (e.g.,		Treatment	
	metformin and contrast dye, bowel preparation).			
3	When prescribing drugs to a patient in renal failure:	Clinical r3easoning	Treatment	
	a) Determine drug safety (e.g., interactions, dose adjustments,			
	metabolic considerations)			
	b) Adjust doses when appropriate (e.g., ACE inhibitors,	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	angiotensin II receptor blockers, metformin, allopurinol, antibiotics, low			
	molecular weight heparin, direct oral anticoagulants)			
	c) Monitor the impact of the drug on the renal function more	Clinical reasoning	Follow-up	
	frequently	Selectivity		
4	Advise patients with existing moderate or severe renal failure to pay	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	close attention to hydration (e.g., when travelling, elderly patients in hot			
	weather, when ill) to avoid exacerbating their condition.			
5	Advise patients with existing renal failure to avoid certain over-the-	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	counter treatments (e.g., NSAIDS, herbals, supplements) as they may			
	worsen their condition.			
6	In patients with moderate or severe renal failure provide anticipatory	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	guidance that if they become ill and cannot maintain fluid intake they	Selectivity		
	should:			

•	Stop certain medications promptly (e.g., ACE inhibitors, diuretics)

•	Seek prompt reassessment

7	In a patient with an exacerbation of their renal failure (acute on chronic			
	renal failure):	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	a) Correct factors (e.g., hydration, pneumonia, congestive heart			
	failure, urinary retention)			
	b) Stop drugs that might be aggravating the situation (e.g., ACE	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	inhibitors, metformin)	Selectivity		
	c) Determine the appropriateness of restarting medications, once	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	renal function has stabilized	Selectivity		
8	Monitor patients with renal failure periodically, as some patients will	Clinical reasoning	Follow-up	
	worsen over time.			
9	For patients with renal failure determine, based on patient factors and	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	local resources, if and when consultation is required (e.g., progressive	Selectivity	Follow-up	
	renal failure, bone disease, refractory anemia, mild renal failure in a			
	young person).			
10	Ensure those involved in consultant care of patients with renal failure are	Communication	Follow-up	
	aware of other important health considerations that may affect decision		Referral	
	making around treatment (e.g., patient preferences, frailty, malignancy,			
	consideration of dialysis in patients with cognitive impairment).			

 






2020	149 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Schizophrenia

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In adolescents and young adults presenting with problem behaviours:

a)	Consider schizophrenia in the differential diagnosis

b)	Reassess the diagnosis as the situation evolves
 



Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

 
2  In apparently stable patients with schizophrenia (e.g., those who are	Clinical reasoning	History
not floridly psychotic) assess periodically in a structured fashion		
(ideally seeking collateral information from family members and other		
caregivers):		

•	Positive and negative symptoms

•	Performance of activities of daily living and their level of social functioning

•	Ideation of harm to themslves or others, including the risk for violence

•	Medication compliance and side effects

•	Substance use

•	Capacity to accept or refuse treatement

	3	When caring for patients with psychosis clearly communicate limits of	Professionalism	Treatment	
		confidentiality to the patient and the family	Communication		
	4	In all patients presenting with psychotic symptoms inquire about	Clinical reasoning	History	
		substance use and abuse.			
	5	In patients with schizophrenia ensure early treatment and follow-up,	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
		including referral and collaborative care, because this may improve	Communication	Referral	
		prognosis.			
	6	In decompensating patients with schizophrenia determine if substance	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		use is a contributor, whether there are medication compliance and		Diagnosis	
		side-effect problems, and if psychosocial supports have changed.			
	7	In a decompensating patient with schizophrenia,	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
		a) Determine whether they meet the criteria for involuntary			
		treatment	Professionalism	Treatment	
		b) Help the patient understand why this is necessary	Communication	Referral	
		c) Clarify your continuing role in care	Patient Centred	Follow-up	
			Communication		
	8	Diagnose and manage serious complications/side effects of	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
		antipsychotic medications (e.g., neuroleptic malignant syndrome,		Diagnosis	
		tardive dyskinesia, cardiometabolic risks).			
	9	Include psychosocial supports (e.g., social determinants of health,	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
		family support, disability issues, vocational rehabilitation) as part of	Selectivity	Referral	
		the treatment plan for patients with schizophrenia.			

 










2020	150 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Seizures

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	In a patient having a seizure:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	a) Ensure proper airway control (e.g., oropharyngeal airway or			
	nasal trumpet, lateral decubitus to prevent aspiration).			
	b) Use drugs (e.g., benzodiazepines, phenytoin) promptly to	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	stop the seizure, even before the etiology is confirmed.			
	c) Rule out reversible metabolic causes in a timely fashion (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Diagnosis	
	hypoglycemia, hypoxia, heat stroke, electrolytes abnormalities).		Hypothesis generation	
				
2	In a patient presenting with an ill-defined episode (e.g., fits, spells,	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	turns), take a history to distinguish a seizure from other events.			
				
3	In a patient presenting with a seizure, take an appropriate history to	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	direct the investigation (e.g., do not overinvestigate; a stable known			
	disorder may require only a drug-level measurement, while new or			
	changing seizures may require an extensive work-up).			
				
4	In all patients presenting with a seizure, examine carefully for focal	Clinical Reasoning	Physical	
	neurologic findings.			
				
5	In a patient with a previously known seizure disorder, who presents			
	with a seizure or a change in the pattern of seizures:	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	a) Assess by history the factors that may affect the primary			
	seizure disorder (e.g., medication compliance, alcohol use, lifestyle,			
	recent changes in medications [not just antiepileptic medications],			
	other illnesses).			
	b) Include other causes of seizure in the differential diagnosis.	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	(Not all seizures are caused by epilepsy.)			
				
6	In the ongoing care of a patient with a stable seizure disorder:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	a) Regularly inquire about compliance (with medication and			
	lifestyle measures). side effects of anticonvulsant medication, and	Patient-centred Approach	History	
the impact of the disorder and its treatment on the patient’s life (e.g., on driving, when seizures occur at work or with friends).
 

b)	Monitor for complications of the anticonvulsant medication (e.g., hematologic complications, osteoporosis).

c)	Modify management of other health issues taking into account the anticonvulsant medication (e.g., in prescribing antibiotics, pregnancy).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 












2020	151 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features

Sex

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
1  Ask about sexual health and function, in a sensitive manner, when	Clinical reasoning	History
appropriate, e.g.:		

•	In conditions with higher risk for sexual dysfunction (e.g., post-MI, diabetes, use of certain medications)

•	Throughout life cycle transitions (e.g., adolescence, pregnancy, menopause, andropause)

•	Not assuming sexual inactivity within specific populations (e.g., people with disabilities, seniors, singles)
	2	Educate patients about sexual health, consent, and safety, especially	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
		patients at risk (e.g., for stigmatization, exploitation), using plain	Communication		
		language appropriate to the age, developmental stage, and culture			
		of the patient.			
	3	With a patient (especially adolescents or those in vulnerable	Communication	Treatment	
		situations) presenting with a concern about sex or sexuality	Professionalism		
		explicitly discuss confidentiality.			
	4	In a patient presenting with sexual dysfunction, perform a	Clinical reasoning	History	
		thorough assessment (including specific systems; mental health;		Hypothesis generation	
		alcohol and substance use; relationship factors and impacts;			
		medication; and sexual history, including positive and negative			
		experiences) to make an accurate diagnosis.			
	5  When caring for a patient with gender or sexuality-related			
		concerns:			
		a) Take opportunities to destigmatize gender and	Communication	History	
		sexuality-related concerns (e.g., using the person’s preferred			
			Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
		pronoun, using terms such as partner instead of boyfriend)			
					
		b) Identify and recognize your own biases, manage them,	Professionalism	History	
		and ensure the patient receives appropriate care		Treatment	
		c) Differentiate between sexual orientation, gender	Clinical reasoning	History	
		identity, and sexual function	Selectivity		
		d) Refer the patient to appropriate specialty care when	Clinical reasoning	Referral	
		indicated			
		e) Inform the patient about available community resources	Communication	Treatment	
	6  When performing a physical examination that triggers an	Professionalism	Physical	
		unexpected response:			
		a) Acknowledge the response	Communication	Treatment	
		b) Stop the examination	Professionalism	Physical	
		c) Discuss the response in a sensitive manner, respecting	Communication	Treatment	
		the dignity of the patient	Professionalism		
		d) Decide on next steps together with the patient	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
			Communication		

 









2020	152 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Sexually Transmitted Infections

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  In a patient who is sexually active or considering sexual activity, take	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
advantage of opportunities to advise her or him about prevention,	Clinical Reasoning	
screening, and complications of sexually transmitted diseases		
(STIs).		


2	In a patient with symptoms that are atypical or non-specific for STIs (e.g., dysuria, recurrent vaginal infections):
	a) Consider STIs in the differential diagnosis.	Selectivity		Hypothesis generation	
		Clinical Reasoning			
	b) Investigate appropriately.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Investigation	
					
3	In high-risk patients who are asymptomatic for STIs, screen and	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
	advise them about preventive measures.	Patient-centred Approach	Investigation	
					
4	In high-risk patients who are symptomatic for STIs, provide	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
	treatment before confirmation by laboratory results.				
					
5	In a patient requesting STI testing:	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
	a) Identify the reason(s) for requesting testing.				
		Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	b) Assess the patient’s risk.	Clinical Reasoning		History	
		Patient-centred Approach	Diagnosis	
	c) Provide counselling appropriate to the risk (i.e., human	Clinical Reasoning		Diagnosis	
	immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection risk, non-HIV risk).	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
					
6	In a patient with a confirmed STI, initiate:	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
	•   treatment of partner(s).			Follow-up	

•	contact tracing through a public health or community agency.


	7	Use appropriate techniques for collecting specimens.	Procedures Skills Clinical	Investigation
			Reasoning	Physical
				
	8	Given a clinical scenario that is strongly suspicious for an STI and a	Selectivity	Diagnosis
		negative test result, do not exclude the diagnosis of an STI (i.e.,	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation
		because of sensitivity and specificity problems or other test		
		limitations).		
				

 















2020	153 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Shortness of Breath

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
1	In a patient with a new presentation of shortness of breath take a	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
	sufficient history to avoid inappropriately or prematurely limiting		History
	the diagnosis to respiratory and cardiac causes (i.e., consider		
	causes such as hematologic, environmental, psychogenic,		
	deconditioning, gastrointestinal).		
2	Regardless of where you assess the patient who presents with	Selectivity	Hypothesis
	shortness of breath (e.g., office, home visit) consider life-		

threatening conditions (e.g., pulmonary embolus, foreign body

aspiration in a child, anaphylaxis, myocardial infarction).

3	When a patient with a diagnosed cause of dyspnea presents with worsening symptoms or treatment failure:

a) Ask about other factors that might have exacerbated	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
their symptoms (e.g., new pets, environmental factors,		History
medication technique/adherence, dietary changes)		
b) Re-evaluate your primary diagnosis (i.e., the original	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
diagnosis may have been incorrect)		
c) Consider co-existing diagnoses (e.g., a patient with	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
asthma who has pneumonia)		
4  In an anxious patient with shortness of breath don’t assume	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis
anxiety is the cause of their symptoms.	Selectivity	

 




































2020	154 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Skin Disorder

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	In dealing with a persistent skin problem that is not responding to			
	treatment as expected:	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Reconsider the diagnosis (e.g., “eczema” may really be a			
	fungal infection).		Diagnosis	
				
	b) Investigate or modify treatment (e.g., for acne).	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
			Investigation	
				
2	In a patient presenting with a skin lesion, distinguish benign from	Selectivity	Physical	
	serious pathology (e.g., melanoma, pemphigus, cutaneous T-cell	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
	lymphoma) by physical examination and appropriate investigations			
	(e.g., biopsy or excision).			

 

3	In a patient presenting with a cutaneous manifestation of a systemic Clinical Reasoning disease or condition (e.g., Wegener’s granulomatosis, lupus, a drug

reaction), consider the diagnosis of systemic disease and confirm it through history, physical examination, and appropriate investigations.

 


Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

 
	4	When prompted by a patient with a concern about a localized skin	Clinical Reasoning		Physical	
		lesion or when screening for mucocutaneous lesions, inspect all				
		areas of the skin (e.g., nails, scalp, oral cavity, perineum, soles of the				
		feet, back of the neck).				
						
	5	Diagnose and promptly treat suspected life-threatening	Selectivity		Diagnosis	
		dermatologic emergencies (e.g., Stevens-Johnson syndrome, invasive			Hypothesis generation	
		cellulitis, chemical or non-chemical burns).				
						
	6	In high-risk patients (diabetics, bed or chair bound, peripheral				
		vascular disease):	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Physical	
		a) Examine the skin even when no specific skin complaint is				
		present.				
		b) Treat apparently minor skin lesions aggressively.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
					
	7	In a patient being treated for a new or persistent skin condition	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
		(e.g., acne, psoriasis), determine the impact on the patient’s personal			History	
		and social life.				
						

 
















2020	155 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Smoking Cessation

		Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
					
	1	In all patients, regularly evaluate and document smoking status,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		recognizing that people may stop or start at any time.		Follow-up	
					
	2	In smokers:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		a) Discuss the benefits of quitting or reducing smoking.			
			Patient-centred Approach		
		b) Regularly assess interest in quitting or reducing smoking.	Clinical Reasoning	History	
				Follow-up	
					
	3	In smokers motivated to quit, advise the use of a multi-strategy	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		approach to smoking cessation.	Communication	Follow-up	
					

 















































2020	156 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Somatization

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In patients with recurrent unexplained or confusing symptoms:

a)	Do not attribute symptoms to somatization unless an adequate workup rules out any medical or psychiatric condition (e.g., depression)
 


Hypothesis generation

Clinical reasoning Diagnosis Patient-centred

Approach

 

b) Reassess the symptoms periodically as they may evolve into	Clinical reasoning	Follow-up	
diagnosable medical conditions/mental health diagnoses or remain	Selectivity		
unexplained			
			
2  When a patient presents with symptoms that may be somatoform			
(e.g., caused by emotional distress) clearly distinguish between the	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
stressed individual with somatoform traits and somatic symptom	Selectivity		
			
disorder by using established diagnostic criteria.			

 

3	In patients with a previously diagnosed somatic symptom disorder do not assume that somatization is the cause of new or ongoing symptoms.

 


Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Patient-centred Approach

 
4	In patients who somatize acknowledge the illness experience and strive to find common ground with them concerning their diagnosis and management, including investigations.

 

Patient-centred	Diagnosis

Approach	Treatment

Communication

 
5	When a patient presents frequently with medically inconsistent or confusing symptoms that are not worrisome:
a)	Order investigations judiciously
 

Clinical reasoning	Investigation

Selectivity

 
	b)  Educate the patient about the connection between physical	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	symptoms and psychological distress	Communication	
			
6	In a patient with existing mental health conditions do not dismiss	Clinical reasoning	Treatment
	new physical symptoms as somatization without appropriate	Selectivity	Follow-up
	assessment.		
			
7	When caring for a patient with somatization identify and manage	Professionalism	Treatment
	your own emotional responses.	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up
			
8	When somatic symptom disorder has been established as the most	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	likely diagnosis recommend and discuss evidence-informed	Clinical reasoning	Referral
	psychotherapy and refer when appropriate, ensuring appropriate		
	ongoing care and follow-up.		

 

9	In patients who have somatic symptoms inquire about the use of and suggest therapies that may provide symptomatic relief and/or help them cope with their symptoms.

 


Professionalism	History

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

 





2020	157 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Stress

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In a patient presenting with a symptom that could be attributed to stress (e.g., headache, fatigue, pain) consider and ask about stress as a cause or contributing factor.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Communication	History

 
2	In a patient in whom stress is identified, assess the impact of the stress on their function (i.e., coping vs. not coping, stress vs. distress).

 

Patient-centred Approach	History

Diagnosis

 
	3	In patients not coping with stress, look for and diagnose, if present,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		mental illness (e.g., depression, anxiety disorder).		Diagnosis	
					
	4	In patients not coping with the stress in their lives,	Patient-centred Approach	History	
		a) Clarify and acknowledge the factors contributing to the			
		stress,	Clinical Reasoning		
		b) Explore their resources and possible solutions for improving	Patient-centred Approach	History	
		the situation.		Treatment	
					
	5	In patients experiencing stress, look for inappropriate coping	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		mechanisms (e.g., drugs, alcohol, eating, violence).	Communication	History	
					

 





































2020	158 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Stroke

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In patients presenting with symptoms and/or signs suggestive of stroke, include other diagnoses in the differential diagnosis (e.g., transient ischemic attack [TIA], brain tumour, hypoglycemia, subdural hematoma, subarachnoid bleed).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
2	In a patient presenting with a stroke, differentiate, if possible,	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	hemorrhagic from embolic/thrombotic stroke (e.g., through the		
	history, physical examination, and ancillary testing, such as scanning		
	and electrocardiography), as treatment differs.		
			
3	Assess patients presenting with neurologic deficits in a timely	Selectivity	Treatment
	fashion, to determine their eligibility for thrombolysis.		

 

4	In a patient diagnosed with stroke, involve other professionals as needed (e.g., a physical therapist, an occupational therapist, social service personnel, a physiatrist, a neurologist) to ensure the best outcome for the patient.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	Referral

 
5	When caring for a stroke patient with severe/serious deficits, involve the patient and her or his family in decisions about intervention (e.g., resuscitation, use of a feeding tube, treatment of pneumonia).

 

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Communication

 
6	In patients who have suffered stroke, diagnose “silent” cognitive	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	deficits (not associated with sensory or motor symptoms or signs,		
	such as inattention and impulsivity) when they are present.		
			
7	Provide realistic prognostic advice about their disabilities to stroke	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	patients and their families.		

 

8	In stroke patients with disabilities, evaluate the resources and supports needed to improve function (e.g., a cane, a walker, home care).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach

 
9	In the continuing care of stroke patients with deficits (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	dysphagia, being bedridden), include the prevention of certain		Hypothesis generation
	complications (e.g., aspiration pneumonia, decubitus ulcer) in the		
	treatment plan, as they are more common.		
			
10	In patients at risk of stroke, treat modifiable risk factors (e.g., atrial	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	fibrillation, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension).		
			
11	In all patients with a history of TIA or completed stroke, and in	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	asymptomatic patients at high risk for stroke, offer antithrombotic		
treatment (e.g., acetylsalicylic acid, clopidogrel) to appropriate

patients to lower stroke risk.

 








2020	159 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Substance use and addiction

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
1	In all patients, and especially in high-risk groups (e.g., those with	Patient-centred Approach	History	
	mental health issues, chronic disability), opportunistically ask	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
	about substance use (tobacco, alcohol, other substances).			
2	For a patient using alcohol or substances (including those who use			
	them only occasionally):	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	a) Discuss the possible impact of their use on themselves and			
	others (e.g., risk to children, sexual indiscretion)	Professionalism		
				
	b) Discuss harm-reduction strategies in detail (e.g., needle	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	exchange, not drinking and driving, immunizations)	Patient-centred Approach		
3	For any patient presenting with a functional decline, confusion, or	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	delirium, assess for alcohol/substance use and withdrawal, even		Diagnosis	
	when other causes may seem more apparent.			
4	Discuss substance use with adolescents and their caregivers when	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	warning signs are present (e.g., school failure, behaviour change).	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
				
5	Consider and look for substance use as a possible factor in	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	problems not responding to appropriate intervention (e.g., alcohol	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	use in patients with hypertriglyceridemia, inhalational drug use in			
	asthmatic patients).			
6	For a patient with a medical problem being treated with opioids,			
	stimulants, sedatives, or hypnotics:	Clinical reasoning	History	
	a) Episodically reassess their clinical problem to affirm the			
	ongoing need for the medication	Selectivity	Follow-up	
				
	b) Discuss tapering and cessation planning when appropriate	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
		Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
	c) Discuss safety and security of medication (e.g. storing, risk	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	to children, diversion, misuse)			
7	For a patient requesting or requiring a new prescription for			
	opioids, stimulants, or tranquillizers:	Clinical reasoning	History	
	a) Assess alcohol and substance use			
	b) Explain clearly the benefits and risks, and do not prescribe		Hypothesis generation	
		Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
	before the risks of misuse have been assessed and mitigated	Professionalism		
8	In patients who use substances or those with a substance use	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
	disorder, regularly determine their readiness to change their	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
	patterns of use.			

 
















2020	160 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features
 




9	For a patient with an alcohol or substance use disorder, assess their level of motivation and engage them in the development of an individualized plan for withdrawal and ongoing treatment that involves:

•	Appropriate use of pharmacotherapy (e.g., methadone, acamprosate)

•	Use of community resources and other health professionals

•	Appropriate follow-up with you

 





Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Clinical reasoning

 
10	In patients with a substance use disorder take advantage of opportunities to screen for comorbidities (e.g., poverty, crime, sexually transmitted infections, mental health issues) and long-term complications (e.g., cirrhosis).

 

Clinical reasoning	History

Patient-centred Approach	Physical

 
11	Offer support to patients and family members affected by substance use disorder. (The user may not be your patient.)

 

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

 











































2020	161 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Suicide

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	Actively inquire about suicidal and homicidal ideation (e.g., ideas, thoughts, a specific plan), particularly when caring for patients with chronic illness, mental illness, or substance use problems; recent loss or emotional distress; impulsivity; or repeated suicidal ideation or attempts.

 


Clinical reasoning	History

Selectivity

 
	2	Given a suicidal patient, assess the degree of risk (e.g., thoughts,	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
		specific plans, access to means, impulsivity) to determine an			
		appropriate intervention and follow-up plan.			
					
	3	In patients who present with self-injury (e.g., cutting):	Clinical reasoning	History	
		a) Assess the risk of suicide, but do not assume that this is			
		a suicidal gesture (not all people who cut are suicidal, but some are)			
		b) Explore the underlying emotional distress	Patient-centred Approach	History	
		c) Discuss alternative adaptive coping strategies	Clinical reasoning	Treatment	
			Patient-centred Approach		
					
	4	In patients at low risk of suicide whom you are managing in the			
		community:			
		a) Provide specific instructions for follow-up	Communication	Follow-up	
					
		b) Develop an appropriate contingency plan with the	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
		patient should their suicidal ideation progress/worsen		Follow-up	
					
	5	When assessing and managing a patient at risk of harm to	Clinical reasoning	Diagnosis	
		themselves or others that has been reported by proxy, balance the	Professionalism	Treatment	
		patient’s and the informant’s rights to confidentiality with the risk			
		of harm to the patient, the informant, or others.			
					
	6	In suicidal patients presenting at the emergency department with a	Clinical reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		suspected drug overdose always screen for acetylsalicylic acid and		Investigation	
		acetaminophen overdoses as these are common, dangerous, and			
		frequently overlooked.			
					
	7	In trauma patients consider attempted suicide as the precipitating	Clinical reasoning	History	
		cause.		Hypothesis generation	
					

 















2020	162 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Thyroid

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	Limit testing for thyroid disease to appropriate patients, namely those with a significant pre-test probability of abnormal results, such as:
 


Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Investigation

 
•	those with classic signs or symptoms of thyroid disease

•	those whose symptoms or signs are not classic, but who are at a higher risk for disease (e.g., the elderly, postpartum women, those with a history of atrial fibrillation, those with other endocrine disorders)


2  In patients with established thyroid disease, do not check thyroid-	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity  Investigation
stimulating hormone levels too often, but rather test at the	
appropriate times, such as:	

•	after changing medical doses

•	when following patients with mild disease before initiating treatment

•	periodically in stable patients receiving treatment

	3  When examining the thyroid gland, use proper technique (i.e., from  Procedures Skills	Physical
	behind the patient, ask the patient to swallow), especially to find	
	nodules (which may require further investigation).	
		
	Note: The investigation of thyroid nodules is not covered here.	
		

 

































2020	163 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Trauma

		Key Feature	Skill		Phase	
						
	1	Assess and stabilize trauma patients with an organized approach,	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
		anticipating complications in a timely fashion, using the primary			Physical	
		and secondary surveys.				
						
	2	Suspect, identify, and immediately begin treating life-threatening	Selectivity		Treatment	
		complications (e.g., tension pneumothorax, tamponade).			Diagnosis	
						
	3	When faced with several trauma patients, triage according to	Selectivity		Treatment	
		resources and treatment priorities.				
						
	4	In trauma patients, secure the airway appropriately (e.g., assume	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
		cervical spine injury, use conscious sedation, recognize a difficult			Hypothesis generation	
		airway, plan for back-up methods/cricothyrotomy).				
						
	5	In a patient with signs and symptoms of shock:	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
		a) Recognize the shock.				
					Diagnosis	
		b) Define the severity and type (neurogenic, hypovolemic,	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Physical	
		septic).			Diagnosis	
		c) Treat the shock.	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Treatment	
						
	6	In trauma patients, rule out hypothermia on arrival and	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
		subsequently (as it may develop during treatment).			Physical	
						
	7	Suspect certain medical problems (e.g., seizure, drug intoxication,	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation	
		hypoglycemia, attempted suicide) as the precipitant of the trauma.				
						
	8	Do not move potentially unstable patients from treatment areas for	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment Investigation	
		investigations (e.g., computed tomography, X-ray examination).				
						
	9	Determine when patient transfer is necessary (e.g., central nervous	Selectivity		Treatment	
		system bleeds, when no specialty support is available).	Clinical Reasoning		Referral	
						
	10	Transfer patients in an appropriate manner (i.e., stabilize them	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
		before transfer and choose the method, such as ambulance or			Referral	
		flight).				
						
	11	Find opportunities to offer advice to prevent or minimize trauma	Clinical Reasoning		Treatment	
		(e.g., do not drive drunk, use seatbelts and helmets).				
						
	12	In children with traumatic injury, rule out abuse. (Carefully assess	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
		the reported mechanism of injury to ensure it corresponds with the			Hypothesis generation	
		actual injury.)				
						

 










2020	164 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Travel Medicine

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	Make sure travelers get up to date, timely, itinerary-specific advice	Clinical Reasoning	History
	from a reliable source (e.g., travel clinic, travel website).		Hypothesis generation
			
2	When seeing patients planning travel, discuss the common, non-	Clinical Reasoning	History
	infectious perils of travel (e.g., accidents, safer sex, alcohol, safe		Hypothesis generation
	travel for women).		

 

3	In patients presenting with symptoms of infection without an obvious cause, especially those with a fever, enquire about recent travel history to identify potential sources (especially, but not exclusively, malaria).

 


Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation

Communication	Follow-up

 
4	Provide prevention and treatment advice and prescribe medications for common conditions associated with travel (e.g., traveler’s diarrhea, altitude sickness).

 

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning	Referral

 
5	Ensure patients understand how to manage their chronic disease	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	while traveling (e.g., diabetes, asthma, international normalized		
	ratios [INRs]).		
			
6	Use patient visits for travel advice as an opportunity to update	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Treatment
	routine vaccinations.		Hypothesis generation
			
7	Advise patients to check insurance coverage issues especially in	Professionalism	Treatment
	regard to recent changes in chronic disease and any recent treatment		Hypothesis generation
	changes.		

 

8	Advise patients traveling with medications to have an adequate supply, documentation of need for use, and to transport them securely (e.g., carry-on bag).

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Hypothesis generation

 


























2020	165 | P a g e
 
			Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features	
		Upper Respiratory Tract Infection			
		Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
					
	1	Given an appropriate history and/or physical examination:	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
		a) Differentiate life-threatening conditions (epiglottitis,			
		retropharyngeal abscess) from benign conditions.			
		b) Manage the condition appropriately.	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
					
	2	Make the diagnosis of bacterial sinusitis by taking an adequate	Clinical Reasoning	History	
		history and performing an appropriate physical examination, and		Treatment	
		prescribe appropriate antibiotics for the appropriate duration of			
		therapy.			
					
	3	In a patient presenting with upper respiratory symptoms:	Clinical Reasoning	History	
		a) Differentiate viral from bacterial infection (through history			
		and physical examination).		Diagnosis	
		b) Diagnose a viral upper respiratory tract infection (URTI)	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
		(through the history and a physical examination).			
		c) Manage the condition appropriately (e.g., do not give	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		antibiotics without a clear indication for their use).	Communication		
					
	4	Given a history compatible with otitis media, differentiate it from	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
		otitis externa and mastoiditis, according to the characteristic		Physical	
		physical findings.			
					
	5	In high-risk patients (e.g., those who have human	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		immunodeficiency virus infection, chronic obstructive pulmonary		Follow-up	
		disease, or cancer) with upper respiratory infections: Lood for			
		complications more aggressively, and follow up more closely.			
					
	6	In a presentation of pharyngitis, look for mononucleosis.	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
				Physical	
					
	7	In high-risk groups:	Selectivity Patient-centred	Treatment	
		a) Take preventive measures (e.g., use flu and pneumococcal			
		vaccines).	Approach		
		b) Treat early to decrease individual and population impact	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		(e.g., with oseltamivir phosphate [Tamiflu], amantadine).	Professionalism		
					

 
















2020	166 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Urinary Tract Infection

		Key Feature	Skill	Phase
				
	1	Take an appropriate history and do the required testing to exclude	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		serious complications of urinary tract infection (UTI) (e.g., sepsis,		Investigation
		pyelonephritis, impacted infected stones).		
				
	2	Appropriately investigate all boys with urinary tract infections, and	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation
		young girls with recurrences(e.g., ultrasound).		
				
	3	In diagnosing urinary tract infections, search for and/or recognize	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		high-risk factors on history (e.g., pregnancy; immune compromise,		History
		neonate, a young male, or an elderly male with prostatic		
		hypertrophy).		
				
	4	In a patient with a diagnosed urinary tract infection, modify the	Selectivity	Treatment
		choice and duration of treatment according to risk factors (e.g.,		
		pregnancy, immunocompromise, male extremes of age); and treat		
		before confirmation of culture results in some cases (e.g.,pregnancy,		
		sepsis, pyelonephritis).		
				
	5	Given a non-specific history (e.g., abdominal pain, fever, delirium)	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		in elderly or very young patients, suspect the diagnosis and do an		Investigation
		appropriate work-up.		
				
	6	In a patient with dysuria, exclude other causes (e.g., sexually	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		transmitted diseases, vaginitis, stones, interstitial cystitis,		Diagnosis
		prostatitis) through an appropriate history, physical examination,		
		and investigation before diagnosing a urinary tract infection.		
				

 





























2020	167 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Vaginal Bleeding

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	In any woman with vaginal bleeding, rule out pregnancy.	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
			Diagnosis	
				
2	In pregnant patients with vaginal bleeding	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Consider worrisome causes (e.g., ectopic pregnancy,			
	abruption, abortion), and confirm or exclude the diagnosis through		Diagnosis	
	appropriate interpretation of test results.			
	b) Do not forget blood typing and screening, and offer rH	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	immunoglobulin treatment, if appropriate.		Hypothesis generation	
	c) Diagnose (and treat) hemodynamic instability.	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
		Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
				
3	In a non-pregnant patient with vaginal bleeding:	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
	a) Do an appropriate work-up and testing to diagnose			
	worrisome causes (e.g., cancer), using an age-appropriate approach.		Diagnosis	
	b) Diagnose (and treat) hemodynamic instability.	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity	Diagnosis	
			Treatment	
	c) Manage hemodynamically stable but significant vaginal	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	bleeding (e.g., with medical versus surgical treatment).			
				
4	In a post-menopausal woman with vaginal bleeding, investigate any	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
	new or changed vaginal bleeding in a timely manner (e.g., with			
endometrial biopsy testing, ultrasonography, computed

tomography, a Pap test, and with a pelvic examination).

 






























2020	168 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Vaginitis

		Key Feature	Skill		Phase
					
	1	In patients with recurrent symptoms of vaginal discharge and/or	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation
		perineal itching, have a broad differential diagnosis (e.g., lichen			Physical
		sclerosus et atrophicus, vulvar cancer, contact dermatitis,			
		colovaginal fistula), take a detailed history, and perform a careful			
		physical examination to ensure appropriate investigation or			
		treatment. (Do not assume that the symptoms indicate just a yeast			
		infection.)			
					
	2	In patients with recurrent vaginal discharge, no worrisome features	Clinical Reasoning		Diagnosis
		on history or physical examination, and negative tests, make a			
		positive diagnosis of physiologic discharge and communicate it to			
		the patient to avoid recurrent consultation, inappropriate			
		trreatment, and investigation in the future.			
					
	3	When bacterial vaginosis and candidal infections are identified	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	History
		through routine vaginal swab or Pap testing, ask about symptoms			Treatment
		and provide treatment only when it is appropriate.			
					
	4	In a child with a vaginal discharge, rule out sexually transmitted	Clinical Reasoning	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation
		infections and foreign bodies. (Do not assume that the child has a			Diagnosis
		yeast infection.)			
					
	5	In a child with a candidal infection, look for underlying illness (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning		Hypothesis generation
		immunocompromise, diabetes).			Diagnosis
					

 































2020	169 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Violent/Aggressive Patient

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In certain patient populations (e.g., intoxicated patients, psychiatric patients, patients with a history of violent behaviour):

a)	Anticipate possible violent or aggressive behaviour.

b)	Recognize warning signs of violent/aggressive behaviour.

c)	Have a plan of action before assessing the patient (e.g., stay near the door, be accompanied by security or other personnel, prepare physical and/or chemical restraints if necessary).

 




Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
2  In all violent or aggressive patients, including those who are	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity  Hypothesis generation
intoxicated, rule out underlying medical or psychiatric conditions	
(e.g., hypoxemia, neurologic disorder, schizophrenia) in a timely	
fashion (i.e., don`t wait for them to sober up, and realize that their	
calming down with or without sedation does not necessariy mean	
they are better).	

 

3	In a violent or aggressive patient, ensure the safety (including appropriate restraints) of the patient and staff before assessing the patient.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Professionalism

 
4  In managing your practice environment (e.g., office, emergency	Professionalism	Treatment
department), draw up a plan to deal with patients who are verbally		
or physically aggressive, and ensure your staff is aware of this plan		
and able to apply it.		
		

 






























2020	170 | P a g e
 
Part III: Priority Topics and Key Features


Well-baby Care

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	Measure and chart growth parameters, including head circumference, at each assessment; examine appropriate systems at appropriate ages, with the use of an evidence-based pediatric flow sheet such as the Rourke Baby Record.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Physical

Procedures Skills

 
2  Modify the routine immunization schedule in those patients who	Clinical Reasoning Selectivity  Treatment
require it (e.g., those who are immunocompromised, those who	
have allergies).	

 

3	Anticipate and advise on breast-feeding issues (e.g., weaning, returning to work, sleep patterns) beyond the newborn period to promote breast-feeding for as long as it is desired.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

 
4	At each assessment, provide parents with anticipatory advice on	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	pertinent issues (e.g., feeding patterns, development, immunization,		
	parenting tips, antipyretic dosing, safety issues).		
			
5	Ask about family adjustment to the child (e.g., sibling interaction,	Patient-centred Approach	History
	changing roles of both parents, involvement of extended family).		

 

6	With parents reluctant to vaccinate their children, address the following issues so that they can make an informed decision:

•	their understanding of vaccinations.

•	the consequences of not vaccinating (e.g., congenital rubella, death).

•	the safety of unvaccinated children (e.g., no Third World travel).

 


Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning	History

 
7	When recent innovations (e.g., new vaccines) and recommendations (e.g., infant feeding, circumcision) have conflicting, or lack defined, guidelines, discuss this information with parents in an unbiased way to help them arrive at an informed decision.

 

Professionalism Treatment Patient-centred Approach

 
8  Even when children are growing and developing appropriately,	Clinical Reasoning	History
evaluate their nutritional intake (e.g., type, quality, and quantity of		Treatment
foods) to prevent future problems (e.g., anemia, tooth decay),		
especially in at-risk populations (e.g., the socioeconomicaly		
disadvantaged, those with voluntarily restricted diets, those with		
cultural variations)		
		

 













2020	171 | P a g e
 


Appendices

 






Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine


Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Priority Topics and Key Features for Mental Health (other than those that overlap with the existing priority topics for family medicine)


2010 List of Core Procedures in Family Medicine





































2020	172 | P a g e
 


Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine20


Priority Topics

1.	Trauma

2.	Patient transfer

3.	Septicemia

4.	Pediatric emergencies

5.	Acute cardiac presentations

6.	Psychiatric emergencies

7.	Diabetic emergencies

8.	Active airway management

9.	Urgent respiratory presentation

10.	Fracture and dislocation management

11.	Intrapartum care

12.	Altered level of consciousness

13.	Procedural sedation

14.	Chronic pain

15.	Indigenous health

16.	Clinical courage

17.	Adapting to rural life

18.	Cultural safety and sensitivity












20	Suggested citation: Blau E, Cambell G, Chase C, Dhillon P, Miller K, Geller B, et al. Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Rural and Remote Family Medicine. Mississauga, ON: College of Family Physicians of Canada; 2018



2010	173 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Trauma

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	When a patient presents with trauma:

a)	Assess and stabilize life-threatening conditions using a standardized approach before addressing non-life-threatening distracting injuries.
 


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Selectivity	Treatment

 
b)	Reassess thoroughly while considering mechanisms of injury, possible underlying causes (e.g., intoxication, seizure, physical abuse), and patient as a whole.
 

Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Selectivity	Follow-up

 
c)	Have a high index of suspicion for significant injuries, and differentiate between multi-organ and single-system trauma

 

Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Selectivity	Diagnosis

 

2	When a need for transfer is suspected, initiate transfer process early.	Selectivity	Treatment
	(see also Patient transfer)
Communication	Referral
					
3	In a complex trauma situation (e.g., multi-patient), assume the	Professionalism	Treatment
	leadership role by:		

•	Communicating clearly

•	Multitasking and triaging appropriately

•	Assigning roles to your team members

•	Mobilizing your community’s resources (e.g., off-service doctors, firefighters, police, clergy) early


4  When treating patients with trauma,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
a) Reassess regularly for change in patient condition			
		Follow-up	
b) Maintain communication with the team, as well as the	Communication	Treatment	
family, and inform them of any changes		Follow-up	
			




See also: Trauma and Loss of Consciousness
 



















2020	174 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Patient transfer

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1  With any patient potentially requiring transfer, consider the
following factors:	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
•	Patient stability	Selectivity	Treatment
•	Own and resources’ limitations

•	Weather conditions and geographic factors

•	Prolonged transfer delays

•	Socio-cultural aspects, and patient’s and family wishes


2  For all patients, assess and recognize those needing immediate	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
transfer and do not delay the transfer for paperwork or further			
investigation unless it will change immediate management.	Selectivity	Referral	
			
3  When a transfer has been decided:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
a) Stabilize the patient and continue to reassess the			
conditions for transfer (e.g., weather) and patient’s status	Selectivity	Follow-up	
b) Initiate communication with the receiving team, clearly and	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
assertively articulating needs and reasons for transfer	Communication	Referral	
c) Assess for the best method(s) of transportation based on the	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
patient’s condition, and weather and geographic factors		Referral	
d) Anticipate possible transfer complications (e.g., barometric	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
trauma, pressure sores) and prepare the patient accordingly (e.g.,	Procedure	Treatment	
ensure IV lines and airway are secured, ensure adequate warming)			

 
e)	Identify the need for accompanying health professionals and consider the implications on the remaining health team and community
 

Professionalism	Hypothesis generation

Selectivity	Treatment

 
f) Ensure ongoing communication with the family, the receiving	Communication	Referral
hospital, and the team		Follow-up
g) Ensure adequate documentation	Communication	Referral
		Follow-up
		
4  1.  During the transfer:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
a)  Ensure regular reassessment of the patient’s status,		Follow-up
including body temperature and pressure points		
		
b) Maintain communication with the receiving hospital	Communication	Referral
		Follow-up
		
a)  Remain engaged and intervene as necessary until the safe	Communication	Referral
handover to the receiving physician	Professionalism	Follow-up
		
See also: Trauma		

 




2020	175 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine


Septicemia

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	For a patient presenting with an infection:	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	a) Recognize early symptoms and signs of sepsis, based on		Diagnosis
	currently accepted guidelines		

 

b)	Be alert to presentations that can be subtle and atypical (e.g., in newborns, children, the elderly)

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Selectivity

 
c) Consider patients at risk (e.g., patients on biologic agents,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
patients with addiction)		Diagnosis	
			
2  For a patient presenting with signs and symptoms of sepsis:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
a) Manage with antibiotics immediately; do not delay treatment	Selectivity		
if there is difficulty in obtaining investigations (e.g., collecting			
culture, imaging)			
			
b) Be aware of the local antibiotic resistance patterns and	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
institute therapy as indicated	Selectivity	Treatment	
			
c) Consider antiviral and/or antifungal therapy	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
		Treatment	
			
3  Monitor septic patients closely and manage without delay as these	Selectivity	Treatment	
patients decompensate quickly:			
•   Recognize septic shock		Follow-up	
•   Recognize the need for vasopressors			
•   Proactively consider patient transfer, based on local			
treatment norms and capacity			

 

4	When treating a septic patient, contact Public Health where applicable to ensure contacts are treated appropriately.

 


Communication	Treatment

Professionalism	Follow-up

 


See also: Infection
 





















2020	176 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Pediatric emergencies

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	When a child presents in distress:

a)	Anticipate rapid deterioration regardless of the setting, and identify life-threatening situations; do not underestimate the seriousness of symptoms if the child presents at the office and not the emergency department
 


Clinical Reasoning	History

Selectivity	Hypothesis generation

 
b) Do not delay treatment and/or transfer when appropriate	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	Selectivity	Treatment	
c) Mobilize appropriate resources	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	Communication		
			
2  When assessing a child in distress:	Clinical Reasoning	Physical	
a) Check vital signs and measure height, weight, and glucose			
	Procedures Skills		
b) Perform a comprehensive physical examination, recognizing	Clinical Reasoning	Physical	
that the history might be incomplete and considering that certain	Procedures Skills		
illnesses may present differently in children			

 
c)	Consider child abuse as an etiology and take appropriate

action

 

Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

 
3	When developing a management plan for a child in distress:	Procedures Skills	Hypothesis generation
	a) Prepare available pediatric equipment and supplies (e.g.,		Treatment
	intraosseous access, Broselow-pediatric emergency tape)		
	b) Base dosage on estimated weight, not age	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
		Procedures Skills	
			
4	When managing a child in distress:	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	a) Be prepared for rapid decompensation	Selectivity	Treatment
	b) Monitor constantly following a systematic approach, and be	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	prepared to resuscitate	Selectivity	Follow-up
			
5	After managing a pediatric emergency and especially after a negative	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up
	outcome:	Professionalism	
a)	Recognize the emotional impact on family, staff, the community, and yourself,
 

b) Debrief and address consequences appropriately

 


Communication Follow-up Professionalism

 

See also: Advanced Cardiac Life Support and Trauma
 








2020	177 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine


Acute cardiac presentations

Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
			
1  For a patient with an acute cardiac presentation:	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
a) Recognize the potentially unstable patient and the need for			
immediate intervention, consultation, and/ or transfer		Treatment	
b) Maintain a high index of suspicion and recognize variable	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
presentations according to gender, age, and lifestyle			
			
2  For a patient presenting with symptoms indicative of a myocardial			
infarction:	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
a) Order and interpret the ECG and available laboratory results			
in a timely fashion	Selectivity	Investigation	
			
b) Initiate treatment based on patient presentation and ECG	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
findings, in an environment where cardiac serology is not available		Treatment	
c) Identify patients requiring thrombolysis, considering absolute	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
and relative contraindications, and manage any complications that		Treatment	
arise			

 
d)	Assess the need for telephone consultation versus immediate or delayed transfer

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Selectivity	Referral

 

See also: Ischemic Heart Disease and Chest Pain
 

































2020	178 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Psychiatric emergencies

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	When developing a differential diagnosis for a patient presenting in	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	a psychiatric crisis, consider cultural differences and potential			
	underlying causes.		Diagnosis	
				
2	For a patient with a diagnosed psychiatric crisis, identify safe	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	disposition, taking into account:			

•	Cultural and geographic setting

•	Local resources

•	Caregiver fatigue


3	When considering admitting or transferring a patient in psychiatric crisis:

	a) Follow the provincial or territorial Mental Health Act, and be	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	aware of the limitations of your local facility to admit and care for			
		Professionalism		
	psychiatric emergencies			
	b) Ensure safety for the patient, family, and staff	Professionalism	Treatment	
	c) Advocate strongly for the patient’s admission to the	Communication	Treatment	
	appropriate level of care	Professionalism	Referral	
				
4	When transferring a patient in psychiatric crisis, consider their need	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	for sedation.		Treatment	
				
5	If faced with a co-worker, friend, or family member in a psychiatric	Professionalism	Treatment	
	crisis, recognize the possibility of your own discomfort, consult		Referral	
	early, and hand over care as soon as possible.			
				

See also: Schizophrenia, Depression and Suicide
 

























2020	179 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Diabetic emergencies

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1  For a patient presenting with symptoms indicative of a blood sugar

related emergency:

	a) Consider and identify hypo- and hyperglycemia even with	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	atypical presentations (e.g., young patients with other symptoms,			
		Selectivity	Diagnosis	
	patients on newer classes of diabetic medications)			
				
	b) Assess for underlying causes (e.g., infection, acute coronary	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	syndrome)		Diagnosis	
	c) Evaluate the need for transfer	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
		Selectivity	Referral	
				
2	For a patient presenting with a hyperglycemic emergency;	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	a) Differentiate diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) from			
	hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS)			
	b) Assess the severity of the metabolic derangement	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
			Diagnosis	
				
3	For a patient with diagnosed DKA or HHS, follow a systematic			

 

approach to management, including using:
 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
•	Point of care tools

•	Laboratory resources

•	Local, tertiary, and online resources

•	Currently accepted guidelines

 

4	Following an acute diabetic emergency, educate the patient and the family about the prevention (including use of local resources) and early recognition of future, similar episodes.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Communication	Follow-up

 



See also: Diabetes
 




















2020	180 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Active airway management

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1  When considering active airway management, use a systematic
approach to assessment and identify:	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
•  Urgency of the situation		Treatment	
			

•	Indications and contraindications to the interventions being considered

•	Available resources (human, equipment, and medications) Possibility of prolonged ventilation support requirements


2	Before securing the airway:	Procedures Skills	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Prepare all necessary equipment			
			Treatment	
	b) Always anticipate a difficult airway and be prepared to use	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	alternative strategies (e.g., laryngeal mask, surgical airways)		Treatment	
				
3	After securing the airway:	Clinical Reasoning	Physical	
	a) Clinically confirm airway placement			

 
b)	Continue to reassess and be prepared for rapid changes in the patient’s status

c)	Ensure eye care, naso-gastric drainage, and urinary catheter

d)	Consider capnography and chest X-ray to confirm placement

 

Selectivity	Follow-up


Procedures Skills	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning	Investigation

 
4	When transferring an intubated patient:

a)	Confirm the correct placement of endotracheal tube at each patient transfer point

b)	Consider specialized transfer requirements (e.g., saline in the cuff, pressure point padding)

 

Clinical Reasoning	Physical

Follow-up


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 

See also: Advanced Cardiac Life Support and Trauma
 



















2020	181 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Urgent respiratory presentations

Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
			
1  When a patient presents in respiratory distress:	Selectivity	Treatment	
a) Manage the distress immediately			
b) Develop a differential diagnosis relying on clinical skills,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
augmenting with imaging when available		Diagnosis	
c) Differentiate between upper and lower airway etiologies	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
			
2  When managing a patient in respiratory distress:	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
a) Consider early active airway management (e.g., inhalation	Selectivity	Diagnosis	
injury, pulmonary contusion), based on the patient’s condition and			
the available resources			
b) Re-evaluate regularly as symptoms evolve and as more	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up	
information becomes available, bearing in mind that			
decompensation can occur quickly			

 
c)	Consider transfer before the patient’s needs exceed local capabilities

 

Clinical Reasoning	Referral

Professionalism

 
3	For a patient with upper airway compromise, act promptly to relieve the obstruction (e.g., peritonsillar abscess, epistaxis, foreign object, epiglottitis).

 

Procedures Skills	Treatment

Selectivity

 



See also: Active airway management, Upper Respiratory Tract Infection, Pneumonia and Chest Pain
 




























2020	182 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Fracture and dislocation management

Key Feature	Skill	Phase


1	For a patient presenting with a fracture or dislocation, assess for	Clinical Reasoning	Physical	
	vascular compromise and neurologic deficit and document.			
		Communication	Diagnosis	
				
2	For a patient with vascular compromise, promptly reduce the	Procedures Skills	Treatment	
	fracture and/or dislocation without waiting  for imaging.	Selectivity		

 

3	For a patient presenting with a suspected fracture:

a)	Splint and immobilize as appropriate and consider analgesia
 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Procedures Skills

 
b) Order appropriate imaging (e.g., specific view, joint above and below), based on the urgency of the situation and the available resources
 

Clinical Reasoning	Investigation

Selectivity

 
	c) Maintain a high index of suspicion for an undisplaced	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	fracture even if the initial X-ray is negative		Investigation	
				
4	For patients with significant fractures, anticipate complications (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	thrombo-embolism, compartment syndrome, occult hemorrhage)			
	and manage accordingly.	Selectivity	Treatment	
				
5	Consider appropriate consultation for certain cases, such as:	Clinical Reasoning	Referral	
	•  An intra-articular fracture	Selectivity		

•	A fracture involving the growth plate

•	An open fracture

 

6	When managing a patient with a fracture or dislocation, communicate clearly with the patient and the family (especially when the patient is a child) regarding the procedure, possible complications, and recovery timelines.

 


Communication	Treatment

 
7	When preparing a patient with a fracture for transfer:

a)	Adequately immobilize the fracture and regularly reassess neurovascular status, including at transfer points

b)	Provide adequate analgesia
 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Procedures Skills


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 

c) Minimize the risk of pressure sores	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment







See also: Procedural sedation, Fractures
 






2020	183 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Intrapartum care

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	During prenatal care, communicate early the benefits and risks of	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	delivering locally versus at a distance.	Patient-centred Approach		
				
2	When deciding on the location for delivery before or during labour,	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	review important existing and evolving factors, such as:			
	•   Cultural preferences regarding birthing	Selectivity		
				
	•	Local resources			
	•	Weather			
	•	Patient’s condition			
				
3	For any woman in late pregnancy or in labour, have a high index of	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	suspicion for non-cephalic presentations and manage appropriately.		Treatment	
				
4	When a fetus is in distress:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	a) Perform intrapartum resuscitative interventions			
	b) Anticipate assisted vaginal delivery or surgical delivery	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
				
5	For a pregnant or postpartum woman, assess for and manage	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	eclampsia if present.			
				Treatment	
				
6	After every delivery:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	a) Be prepared to manage postpartum hemorrhage			
	b) Assess for the presence of lacerations, including a rectal exam	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	when indicated		Treatment	
				
	c) Manage appropriately and identify those lacerations that	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	require consultation	Procedures Skills	Referral	
				
				
7	For all stable women and neonates, encourage and support	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	breastfeeding, especially in regions with poor water quality.			
			Patient-centred Approach		
					

See also: Pregnancy and Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Intrapartum and Perinatal Care
 















2020	184 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine


Altered level of consciousness

Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
							
1  For a patient presenting with an altered level of consciousness:	Clinical Reasoning	History	
a) Obtain a comprehensive history and perform a detailed		Physical	
clinical assessment			
b) Quickly identify and manage common reversible causes (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
hypoglycemia, opioid overdose, sepsis, hypothermia)	Selectivity	Treatment	
c) Identify the need for additional tests that may require patient	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
transfer to another facility	Selectivity	Referral	
d) Reassess frequently for any change in status	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
					Selectivity	Follow-up	
							
2  When a patient with an altered level of consciousness presents in an	Professionalism	Treatment	
agitated or aggressive state, optimize the safety of the patient and			
			
the staff.			
							
See also: Loss of Consciousness and Dementia
		
							

 





































2020	185 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine


Procedural sedation

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	When considering procedural sedation, recognize the difference	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	between elective and emergent situations and obtain consent			
	accordingly.	Selectivity	Treatment	
				
2	When preparing for procedural sedation:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	

a)	Ensure adequate support and equipment, including a rapid sequence intubation protocol
 

b)	Select medications and equipment appropriate to the clinical presentation, considering personal knowledge and skill

c)	Always check the doses according to patient’s weight, especially for children
 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Selectivity

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
d) Consider airway protection for compromised patients	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
		Treatment	
			
3  When performing procedural sedation, anticipate, monitor for, and	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
respond to potential complications (e.g., laryngospasm,			
hypoventilation, hypotension).			

 

4	For a patient who has undergone procedural sedation,

a)	Ensure an adequate recovery observation period
 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 

b)	Ensure the patient is accompanied by a responsible person if they are being discharged

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Professionalism

 



See also: Fractures and Lacerations
 

























2020	186 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Chronic pain in rural and remote settings

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	For a patient presenting with chronic pain, recognize that social	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	determinants of health and previous conditions (e.g., trauma, abuse,			
	addiction) may contribute to the pain syndrome.		Hypothesis generation	
				
2	When treating patients with chronic pain, optimize non-opioid	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	medications and strive to provide non- pharmacological			
	management (e.g., trauma-informed counselling, physiotherapy,	Selectivity		
	splinting/bracing, joint  and trigger point injections).			
				
3	When caring for a patient who has been prescribed opioids for	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	chronic pain, use all resources available in the community			
	(including the local pharmacy) to develop an effective local approach	Patient-centred Approach		
	to prescribing that minimizes addiction potential, enhances			
	treatment, and promotes safety.			
				
4	When caring for patients with chronic pain in a rural or remote	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	environment with difficult access to other resources, actively			
	advocate for patients’ access to services.	Professionalism		
				
				


See also: Pain and Chronic Pain
 


































2020	187 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Indigenous health

These key features may apply equally to other underserved rural and remote populations.

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	When caring for Indigenous populations:

a)	Recognize personal prejudice, assumptions, and generalizations

b)	Consider local cultural norms of different population groups
 


Professionalism	Hypothesis generation




Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation

Treatment

 
c) Recognize the systemic and individual effects of historical and Patient-centred Approach	History
ongoing government policies toward Indigenous populations and	Treatment
the impact these have on their health status	

 
d)	Take the necessary time to establish trust and find common ground

e)	Recognize the connection between poor health and social

determinants of health, and actively advocate for patients’ access to services

 

Patient-centred Approach	History

Communication	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Professionalism	Treatment

 
2	When assessing Indigenous patients, consider diseases that are	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	prevalent in the local area (e.g., tuberculosis, water-			
	related/environmental diseases, diseases related to traditional food			
	sources).			
				
3	When caring for Indigenous populations, consider the impact of	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	dental health, and educate patients and families about dental care.	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
				
4	When caring for Indigenous populations, consider the effect of the	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	geographical location (e.g., amount of daylight, isolation, food	Patient-centred Approach		
	access) on mental and physical health.			
				
5	For Indigenous patients with suicidality, identify safe places and	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	involve available supports.	Selectivity		
				
6	When considering transfer for Indigenous patients, recognize the	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	potential trauma related to leaving their community and treat	Patient-centred Approach		
				

locally when possible.


See also: Professionalism themes 3,6, and 9, Patient Centred Approach, Suicide and Periodic Health Assessment/Screening
 









2020	188 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine



Clinical courage

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	When dealing with a clinical situation that might surpass your level of comfort:

a) Do not minimize the situation (e.g., underestimate the necessary level of skill, ignore the complexity of the situation to avoid dealing with it) and do not overreact (e.g., over transferring, over consulting)

b) Assess comprehensively, considering the resources, presentation, indications, and contraindications of proposed interventions
 




Professionalism	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning




Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Selectivity	Treatment

 
c) Develop a management plan	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	Patient-centred Approach	
		
2  When considering an intervention that surpasses your level of	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
comfort, be prepared to take a risk by:	Professionalism	

•	Drawing on your parallel education or knowledge

•	Anticipating difficulties and consulting when appropriate, seeking local and external support

•	Following a patient-centred approach and maintaining communication with the patient or advocate, in order to ensure that you are acting in their best interest


3	After an encounter that was beyond your level of comfort, reflect,	Professionalism	Follow-up
	debrief with colleagues, and identify learning opportunities.	Clinical Reasoning	
			
4	When caring for a patient with an uncertain diagnosis in a rural or	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up
	remote area where resources may be limited, recognize that	Patient-centred Approach	
	repeated assessment over time will help provide reassurance that		
	appropriate care is being provided.		
			


See also: Professionalism, themes #2,3,6 and 7
 



















2020	189 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine


Adapting to rural life

Developing a sensitivity to local culture and social norms provides a foundation for becoming familiar with your local community. Some individuals may adapt seamlessly, while others may have difficulty making the transition.

When working in a rural or remote environment:

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  Recognize your own needs and the needs of your family in order to	Professionalism	
develop a sustainable and satisfying lifestyle.		

 

2	Remain aware of personal visibility in the community and the overlap between personal and professional life.

 


Professionalism

 
3	Ensure patients’ privacy, keeping in mind that the community is connected in ways of which you may not be aware.

 

Professionalism Treatment Patient-centred Approach

 
4	Be aware that creating and maintaining appropriate boundaries may	Professionalism	Treatment
	be more challenging in rural environments.	Patient-centred Approach	
			
5	Actively participate in community life.	Professionalism	
		Communication	
			
6	Consider maintaining academic connections with a medical school as	Professionalism	
	a preceptor.		
			
7	Be prepared to share the administrative responsibilities of health	Professionalism	
	care in your community (e.g., chief of staff, leadership roles,		
	committee participation).		

 

8	Recognize a strong emotional response and possible post-traumatic stress in yourself and staff after treating a co-worker, friend, or family member, or after a traumatic medical or community event, and address it appropriately.

 


Professionalism

Communication

 
9	Establish safe supportive relationships with other health care professionals (including those from other communities) where

difficult medical and social issues may be discussed in an informal manner (e.g., Balint group, problem-based small group learning, Society of Rural Physicians of Canada).

 

Professionalism

Communication

 
10  Have your own family physician	Professionalism




See also: Professionalism themes 8, 10 and 11
 





2020	190 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Rural and Remote Family Medicine


Cultural safety and sensitivity

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	When providing health care in a rural or remote community,	Professionalism	Treatment
	familiarize yourself with local traditions,  beliefs, and habits, and	Patient-centred Approach	
	recognize cultural differences in order to anticipate and prevent		
	potential conflicts.		
			
2	When caring for patients in a rural or remote setting, remain aware	Professionalism	Treatment
	of the already limited choices and resources available to the patients	Patient-centred Approach	
	and that your values may further affect health care services provided		
	in  your community (e.g., opioid prescribing, birth control).		
			
3	When caring for patients in a rural or remote community:	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	a) Identify their priorities, expectations, and preferences (e.g.,	Communication	
	patient transfer, birth, palliative care and dying)		
			
	b) Demonstrate respect for important local practices (e.g., sweat	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	lodge, smudge ceremony, cupping)	Professionalism	
			
	c) Consider enlisting the assistance of people who are fluent in	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	the patient’s culture (e.g., minister, elder)	Professionalism	
			
4	When working in a community with a predominant ethnic or	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	religious group, avoid generalizing and assuming that all community	Professionalism	
	members share the same beliefs and create a safe place for all		
	individuals.		
			



See also: Professionalism themes 3, 5, 6 and 10
 

























2020	191 | P a g e
 


Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care21



Priority Topics

1	Normal labour and delivery

2	Fetal health surveillance during labour

3	Pain in labour

4	Labour dystocia

5	Vacuum assisted delivery

6	Vacuum assisted delivery—procedure skill

7	Shoulder dystocia

8	Shoulder dystocia—procedure skill

9	Postpartum hemorrhage

10	Perineal lacerations—procedure skill

11	Peripartum fever

12	Antepartum bleeding—after 20 weeks gestation

13	Non-cephalic fetal presentation

14	Pre-labour rupture of membranes

15	Preterm labour

16	Trial of labour after Caesarian

17	Induction of labour

18	Peripartum mental health

19	Gestational hypertension/preeclampsia

20	Gestational diabetes

21	Breastfeeding

22	First week of life

23	Working in teams

24	Limits—practising according to personal and facility limits







21	Suggested citation: Biringer A, Ehman W, Fenton S, Gagnon A, Graves L, Miller K, Northorp S, et al. Priority Topics and Key

Features for the Assessment of Competence in Intrapartum and Perinatal Care. Mississauga, ON: College of Family Physicians of Canada; 2017



2010	192 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care



Normal labour and delivery

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  When a woman22 presents in labour,	Clinical Reasoning	History
a)	Assess for risk factors that identify those women for whom vaginal birth is not appropriate
 

b)	Establish the preferred expectations for the delivery with the woman and her supports

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	History

 

2	When a woman presents in labour,	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	a) Diagnose the stage and the phase of labour based on history			
	and abdominal and pelvic exam			
	b) Decide whether or not to admit based on appropriate	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	medical, social, and personal factors in order to reduce premature	Selectivity		
	admissions			
				
3	Throughout labour:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	a) Provide support and pain management, using a patient-			
	centred approach and multiple options (e.g., mobility, different	Patient-centred Approach		
	positions)			
	b) Monitor maternal and fetal well-being, in order to recognize	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	any changes that would alter the management plan			

 
c) Follow progress regularly

d)	Avoid unnecessary or premature interventions (e.g., using uterotonics when not in active labour)

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Selectivity	Treatment

 
4	During the second stage of labour:

a)	Initiate pushing at the appropriate time, respecting the woman’s preferred position and expulsive efforts
 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
b) Conduct a controlled delivery in order to minimize trauma	Procedures Skills	Treatment	
			
5  Immediately following vaginal birth:			
a) Care for the well newborn with skin-to-skin care, assessment,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
delayed cord clamping, and early initiation of breastfeeding			
b) Assess the need for resuscitation of the newborn and manage	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
appropriately		Treatment	
			
c) Assess uterine tone and bleeding, and administer	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
prophylactic oxytocin in the third stage			




22	We are cognizant and respectful that not all pregnant individuals will identify with traditional gender roles. Our choice of the word “woman” to refer to the pregnant individual was chosen for consistency and ease throughout the document and is not intended to exclude those for whom this is not their chosen term.
 

2010	193 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


d) Deliver the placenta, avoiding unnecessary traction	Procedures Skills	Treatment
e) Assess and manage perineal injury	Clinical Reasoning	Physical Exam
		Treatment
		
6  Following a vaginal delivery:	Communication	Follow-up

a)	Debrief with the team, including the woman and her supports, and document appropriately
 

b)	Reassess the woman and baby, and review ongoing management plans before leaving the birthing unit

 


Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up

 


















































2020	194 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Fetal health surveillance during labour

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	Whenever a woman presents in labour, assess the risk factors and the overall context to select and initiate the appropriate method, frequency, and timing of fetal surveillance (intermittent auscultation (IA) versus electronic fetal monitoring (EFM)):

•	Assessment of risk factors and context must be current

•	In general, use IA for women without risk factors and EFM when risk factors are present

•	Ensure fetal surveillance is maintained as per a standard protocol

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Selectivity	Treatment

 
2	When reviewing the findings on fetal surveillance, always correlate	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	fetal heart rate with uterine activity.		Investigation	
				
3	When conducting fetal health surveillance during labour, classify	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	and document the fetal surveillance as per standardized	Communication		
	classification (i.e., normal, atypical, or abnormal).			
				
4	When interpreting fetal surveillance,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Look for and recognize the abnormalities, especially the			
	subtle ones that require immediate action			
	b) Act promptly to resolve the situation.	Selectivity	Treatment	
				
5	When abnormal or atypical fetal surveillance is observed:			
	a) Interpret within the context of the whole pregnancy and	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	labour (e.g., stage and progress of labour, maternal stability,			
				

maternal/fetal risk factors, duration of abnormalities)
 

b)	Assess for etiology and contributing factors

c)	Institute appropriate intrauterine resuscitation, and when abnormal fetal surveillance is not corrected by intrauterine resuscitation, institute a plan for delivery

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 


















2020	195 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Pain in labour

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	Prior to labour, discuss pain and pain relief with women, correcting	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	misconceptions and providing education.		
			
2	For a woman in labour, use a patient-centred approach to clarify her	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	pain experience and her emotional state, as well as her expectations		
	and preferences for pain management.		
			
3	When managing pain for a woman in labour, optimize the use and	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	effectiveness of support and other non-pharmacological measures		
	(e.g., hydrotherapy, TENS, ambulation).		
			
4	When providing pharmacological pain relief in labour, use an	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	appropriate method (e.g., opiates, nitrous oxide, epidural		
	anesthesia), taking into account the woman’s choices, the stage of		
	labour, available resources and possible side-effects (e.g., fetal		
	surveillance changes, newborn respiratory depression, labour		
	prolongation).		
			
5	For a woman using analgesia in labour, look for and manage side	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	effects (e.g., maternal fever, fetal surveillance changes).		Treatment
			
6	When pain in labour is unusual or unresponsive to typically	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	effective management, assess to rule out unusual or pathological		
	causes (e.g., uterine rupture, pulmonary embolus, history of sexual		
	abuse) that would require other interventions or approaches.		
			

 





























2020	196 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Labour dystocia

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  When a woman presents with possible labour, diagnose or rule out	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
active labour, based on history and on abdominal and pelvic		
examination (i.e., avoid premature admission to labour and		
delivery).		

 

2	For a woman in labour:

a)	Assess and document progress of labour by following cervical dilation and fetal descent.
 


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Communication

 
b)	Make a diagnosis of labour dystocia based on lack of progress in cervical dilation in the first stage of labour and fetal descent in the second stage, and in the context of maternal and environmental factors; avoid making the diagnosis too early or too late

 

Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Selectivity

 
3	When labour dystocia is suspected, or diagnosed:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	a) First consider and use non-pharmacological methods to treat			
	(e.g., ambulation, continuous support, amniotomy)			
	b) Systematically look for and identify possible contributing	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	factors (i.e., uterine contractility, fetal size and presentation, pelvic		Diagnosis	
	architecture, maternal pain and psychological state) in order to			
	optimize management			
				
4	For a woman with labour dystocia that has not responded to	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	appropriate non-pharmacological intervention, use an appropriate		Follow-up	
	uterotonic medication, while maintaining careful surveillance of			
	maternal and fetal well-being.			
				
5	For a woman with labour dystocia, look for and recognize the fetal	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	and maternal indications for operative delivery.		Diagnosis	
				
				

 






















2020	197 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Vacuum assisted delivery

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	For a woman in labour, look for signs that she may need an assisted Clinical Reasoning delivery (e.g., labour dystocia, atypical or abnormal fetal

surveillance, maternal fatigue) and, when these signs are present, start the appropriate preparations, including a backup plan with additional help as necessary.

 


Hypothesis generation

Treatment

 
2	When assisted delivery is contemplated, assess for contraindications Clinical Reasoning (e.g., any presentation other than cephalic, cervix not fully dilated,

unengaged head, < 34 weeks) and, when present, make appropriate alternative plans for delivery.

 

Hypothesis generation

Treatment

 
3	When an assisted delivery is indicated, discuss the options with the woman, obtain informed consent, and prepare the team.

 

Communication Treatment Patient-centred Approach

 
4	When performing an assisted delivery, use a standardized approach	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	(e.g., the A to J mnemonic from ALARM).		
			
5	When an assisted delivery is not progressing as expected, do not	Selectivity	Treatment
	persist with excessive efforts, but abandon the procedure and		
	initiate the alternative backup delivery plan.		

 

6	Following an assisted delivery, examine the woman and the newborn for signs of trauma (e.g., high vaginal laceration, third-degree tear, subgaleal bleeding) or need for further care.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Physical Exam

Follow-up

 
7  At the appropriate time following an assisted delivery, debrief with   Communication	Follow-up
the woman (and her supports), and with the team. Document	
thoroughly.	
See also General Key Features of Procedure Skills for Family Medicine for technical aspects.	
			

 






















2020	198 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care




Vacuum assisted delivery—procedure skill

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  When considering a vacuum assisted delivery, confirm full cervical	Procedures Skills	Treatment
dilatation and assess the station and position of the head to ensure		
that the procedure is safe and likely to succeed.		

 

2	Prior to placing the vacuum, optimize the chance of success by ensuring adequate analgesia, emptying the woman’s bladder, and engaging the woman and her supports in the procedure. Check that the equipment is working and that a backup plan is in place.

 


Procedures Skills	Treatment

Communication

 
3	When applying the vacuum cup, ensure that the position is correct,	Procedures Skills	Treatment
	there is no entrapment of maternal tissue, and appropriate vacuum		
	pressure is being applied.		
			
4	When performing a vacuum assisted delivery, apply traction during	Procedures Skills	Treatment
	maternal pushing and pull firmly but not excessively, without		
	pivoting. Apply traction in the direction of the pelvic curve, initially		
	downward and finally upward.		

 

5  When applying traction, assess descent on each pull. Reassess the	Procedures Skills
plan if there are indications that the procedure will not succeed:	

•	No progress after two pulls with a properly positioned cup and good traction

•	Three pop-offs without obvious cause

•	Delivery not imminent after four contractions

•	Delivery not imminent after 20 minutes of vacuum application

 


Hypothesis generation

Treatment

 

Note: See also General Key Features of Procedure Skills for Family Medicine for technical aspects.
 






















2020	199 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Shoulder dystocia

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  For all deliveries, assess risk factors for shoulder dystocia, develop a	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
plan of management according to the risks, and adjust the		Treatment
preparations according to the evolving risks.		

 

2	For all deliveries, anticipate and remain vigilant for the signs of impending shoulder dystocia and, when appropriate, prepare the woman and the team for the possibility of shoulder dystocia.

 


Selectivity	Hypothesis generation

Communication	Treatment

 
3	During the second stage of labour, recognize shoulder dystocia promptly when it occurs, communicate its presence clearly to the team, including the woman, and, working as a team, use appropriate manoeuvres to resolve it.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Communication	Treatment

 
4  After the shoulder dystocia is resolved:	Clinical Reasoning	Physical Exam
a) Examine the mother and the newborn for signs of trauma		Follow-up
		
b) Debrief with the team, including the woman and her	Communication	Follow-up
supports		

 

c)	Document the manoeuvres used and the timing of events (including head to shoulder time)

 


Communication	Follow-up

 



Note: See also General Key Features of Procedure Skills for Family Medicine for technical aspects.
 






























2020	200 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Shoulder dystocia—procedure skill

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	When a shoulder dystocia occurs, inform the team (including the	Procedures Skills	Treatment
	woman), call for additional assistance, and immediately implement	Communication	
	an accepted algorithm to resolve the dystocia.		
			
2	When managing a shoulder dystocia, avoid actions that may	Procedures Skills	Treatment
	increase the shoulder impaction (e.g., pressure on the fundus,		
	maternal pushing when the shoulder remains impacted) or that may		
	injure the baby (e.g., traction on the head, pivoting the head to		
	rotate the shoulders). Coach the woman to push only when		
	instructed.		
			
3	When managing a shoulder dystocia, use a systematic approach that	Procedures Skills	Treatment
	includes:		

•	External manoeuvres: hyperflexion of the hips (McRoberts), suprapubic pressure on the anterior shoulder, all fours position

•	Internal manoeuvres: shoulder rotations (Rubin, Woods, delivery of posterior arm

•	Episiotomy if required to perform internal manoeuvres


4	When managing a shoulder dystocia, complete one manoeuver	Procedures Skills	Treatment
	before encouraging more maternal pushing. Then, if it does not		
	work, move rapidly to the next manoeuver before the next pushing		
	effort.		
			
5	If initial manoeuvres are unsuccessful, repeat them, perfecting the	Procedures Skills	Treatment
	technique, and focusing on the manoeuvres that are most likely to		

be successful (e.g., removal of posterior arm, changing maternal position). Call for additional assistance.




Note: See also General Key Features of Procedure Skills for Family Medicine for technical aspects.
 



















2020	201 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Postpartum hemorrhage

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	For all pregnant women, identify risk factors for postpartum hemorrhage (PPH; e.g., grand multiparous, prolonged labour, anticoagulants) and prepare accordingly.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Treatment

 
2	Manage the third stage of labour with a prophylactic uterotonic,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	consideration of controlled cord traction, and assessment of uterine		
	tone after placental delivery.		
			
3	Following all births, closely monitor for ongoing blood loss (both	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up
	visible and occult) in order to accurately estimate the total blood		
	loss, and to promptly recognize and diagnose a PPH.		

 

4	When a diagnosis of PPH is made:

a)	Identify whether the woman is stable or unstable and adjust management accordingly
 


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Selectivity	Treatment

 
b) Activate the team early to provide extra support

c)	Look for correctible etiologies, in order to treat, specifically

•   Poor uterine tone (uterotonics)

•   Retained products of conception (remove)

•   Trauma (repair)

•   Distended bladder (urinary catheter)

•   Coagulation deficit (correct)
 

Communication	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

 
d)	Monitor closely to anticipate and recognize the need for further intervention

 

Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up

 
5	For a PPH that has stabilized, continue to monitor over an extended period until recurrence is unlikely.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up

 
6	For a woman who has had a PPH, provide counselling for subsequent pregnancies.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up

 




















2020	202 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care




Perineal lacerations—procedure skill

Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
			
1  After every delivery, assess for the presence, location, and degree of	Procedures Skills	Treatment	
perineal laceration, including a rectal exam when appropriate.		Diagnosis	
Distinguish between those that need repair and those that do not.			
			
2  When a perineal laceration occurs:	Procedures Skills	Treatment	
a) Ensure that optimal conditions (e.g., assistance, lighting,			
retraction, hemostasis, analgesia) are present for assessment and			
repair			
Identify complicated perineal injury (e.g., third- or fourth-degree	Procedures Skills	Treatment	
tear, high vaginal laceration) and consider the need for assistance or		Diagnosis	
consultation for the repair			

 
Repair lacerations using techniques that will reduce the risk of complications (e.g., bleeding, infection, incontinence, pain)

 

Procedures Skills	Treatment

 
3	In the presence of a second-degree perineal laceration, repair using a	Procedures Skills	Treatment	
	systematic approach that includes:			
	•   Identifying key anatomic structures—apex of laceration,			
	•	hymenal ring, perineal muscles, intact anal sphincter			
		Securing the apex and aligning the hymen and the perineal			
		body, then suturing the vaginal mucosa from apex to			
		hymen			
	•   Suturing the perineal muscles			
	•	Suturing the skin or planning to let heal by secondary			
		intention			
				
4	Following the repair of perineal laceration, re-examine for	Procedures Skills	Treatment	
	completeness of repair and hemostasis. This may include a rectal			
	examination.			
					


Note: See also General Key Features of Procedure Skills for Family Medicine for technical aspects.
 

















2020	203 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Peripartum fever

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	When a labouring or postpartum woman has a fever, determine	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	whether the cause is an infection (e.g., chorioamnionitis,			
	endometritis, pyelonephritis) or not (e.g., epidural, work of labour),			
	and re-evaluate the diagnosis regularly.			
				
2	When a labouring or postpartum woman has a suspected infection:			
	a) Anticipate the possible impacts of the infection on the	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	woman and the fetus/neonate			
				
	b) Conduct appropriate investigations, maternal monitoring,	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
	and fetal surveillance or newborn assessment			
				
	c) Initiate treatment without delay	Selectivity	Treatment	
				
3	When chorioamnionitis is suspected, treat empirically and	Selectivity	Treatment	
	aggressively (e.g., IV broad-spectrum antibiotics), even for those			
	who have received GBS antibiotic prophylaxis, and formulate a plan			
	for delivery.			
				
4	For all postpartum women:	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Identify those at higher risk of infection (e.g., long labour,			
	Caesarean section)			

 
b)	Recognize early signs of infection

c)	Advise regarding symptoms and when to seek care

 

Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Communication

 





























2020	204 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Antepartum bleeding—after 20 weeks gestation

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	For a woman presenting with antepartum bleeding, first assess the	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	stability of both the woman and the fetus, as urgent management			
	must begin for unstable patients before the exact cause of the			
	bleeding has been confirmed.			
				
2	If the woman with antepartum bleeding is unstable or if there is			
	suspected fetal compromise	Selectivity	Treatment	
	a) Resuscitate immediately			
	b) Mobilize the necessary resources for urgent delivery	Communication	Treatment	
	c) Monitor the situation	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	d) Identify the cause of the bleeding	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
				
3	While managing a woman with antepartum bleeding, assess to	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	diagnose the cause of the bleeding, using methods that minimize			
	risks of harm, to recognize potentially life threatening causes:			

•	Obtain history (e.g., onset, quantity of bleeding, presence of pain, trauma)

•	Determine placental location by ultrasound (previous or current) prior to vaginal exam (do not perform vaginal exam unless placenta previa is ruled out)

•	Assess the uterus (e.g., activity, tone, tenderness) and fetal well-being

•	Use other diagnostic techniques as indicated (e.g., speculum exam)

 

4	For a woman with antepartum bleeding who is stable with normal Clinical Reasoning fetal surveillance, provide ongoing assessment and management
based on the diagnosis and the gestational age (e.g., manage Rh status, administer corticosteroids for fetal lung maturity). Decide whether hospitalization or transfer is indicated and the likely mode of delivery.

 


Treatment

Diagnosis

 
5  Following a resolved episode of antepartum bleeding, inform the	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up
woman and her supports about the risks of antepartum bleeding in		
current and in subsequent pregnancies, and about strategies to		
minimize the risk.		
		

 











2020	205 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Non-cephalic fetal presentation

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	For any woman in the third trimester or in labour, determine the	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	exact fetal presentation using appropriate techniques (e.g.,		
	Leopold’s manoeuvers, vaginal exam if indicated, ultrasound).		
			
2	When a non-cephalic presentation has been identified pre-labour,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	discuss, with the woman and her supports, alternative plans or		Follow-up
	possibilities for delivery (e.g., external cephalic version, trial of		
	labour, planned Caesarean section) according to the presentation.		
Inform the woman of possible complications (e.g., cord prolapse)

and appropriate actions.

 

3  When a non-cephalic presentation is identified in labour, discuss	Clinical Reasoning
the delivery options with the woman, while seeking consultation	
and team support as necessary, and while initiating preparations for	
a possible Caesarian section.	

 


Treatment

Referral

 
4	When facilitating an imminent unavoidable breech delivery,	Procedures Skills	Treatment
	optimize the process by avoiding traction on the fetus, ensuring that		
	the back remains up, and ensuring head flexion through delivery.		
			
5	After a vaginal breech delivery, anticipate that the newborn is more	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	likely to require resuscitation.		
			

 

































2020	206 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Pre-labour rupture of membranes

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	For pregnant women presenting with vaginal fluid loss, look for and Clinical Reasoning diagnose pre-labour rupture of membranes using history,

abdominal exam to verify presentation, speculum exam (avoid doing vaginal examination unless indicated for management), and fluid inspection and analysis (e.g., nitrazine, ferning test).
 


Hypothesis generation

Diagnosis

 
2	For a woman with signs and symptoms suggestive of pre-labour rupture of membranes (PROM) but negative confirmatory tests, do not exclude the possibility of PROM, and plan appropriate fetal/maternal surveillance for signs of fever and/or infection.
 

Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Selectivity	Treatment

 
3  For all women with PROM at term, rule out contraindications to	Clinical Reasoning	History	
vaginal delivery, and, if there are no contraindications, offer		Treatment	
induction of labour through an informed discussion within the			
context of risk factors (e.g., GBS status), patient preference, and			
system demands (e.g., staffing availability).			
4  In a woman with PROM in whom labour has not been induced:			
a) Monitor for signs of infection (e.g., fever, fetal tachycardia,	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
odour) even for those patients on prophylactic antibiotics			
b) Treat suspected or confirmed chorioamnionitis aggressively	Selectivity	Treatment	
and early (e.g., IV antibiotics), and do not rely on the previous			
prophylactic treatment			
			
5  In a woman with preterm PROM:			
a) Initiate treatment as per local protocol (e.g., admission,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
steroids, IV antibiotics, and monitoring)			
			
Plan appropriate definitive treatment depending on gestational age	Clinical Reasoning	Referral	
and the capacity of the facility and team, and considering the			
indications for consultation or for transfer to another care facility			

 

6	When a baby is born after pre-labour rupture of membranes, assess for signs of sepsis, and initiate treatment promptly if sepsis is suspected.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Selectivity

 
















2020	207 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Preterm labour

Key Feature	Skill	Phase
		
1  When assessing a pregnant woman who is not in labour, look for	Clinical Reasoning	History
risk factors for premature labour, and manage the treatable factors		Treatment
to reduce risk whenever possible.		

 

2	When caring for a pregnant woman who is not in labour, educate her and her supports about signs and symptoms of preterm labour and how to seek help.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Communication

 
3	For a woman presenting in suspected preterm labour, confirm the	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation
	presence or absence of labour, using appropriate techniques (e.g.,		
	assessment of contractions, sterile speculum exam, fetal fibronectin,		
	cervical assessment).		
			
4	For a woman in preterm labour, manage according to the	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	gestational age and fetal surveillance to minimize neonatal		
	morbidity and mortality by:		

•	Mobilizing the team to ensure availability of resources, including early consultation, that may be needed for the mother and the infant

•	Administering appropriate medications (e.g., antenatal corticosteroids, tocolytics, antibiotics, magnesium sulphate)

•	Arranging for transfer if necessary, at the appropriate time

 

5	Following the birth of a preterm infant, particularly one who requires intensive care, provide support and advocacy for the woman and family, in the context of an ongoing therapeutic relationship.

 


Communication	Treatment

Patient-centered Approach	Follow-up

 

























2020	208 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Trial of labour after Caesarian

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	In a woman who has had a Caesarean section, assess the risks and benefits of a trial of labour after Caesarian (TOLAC) and discuss in order to identify those who are good candidates, those who are not good candidates, or where it would be contraindicated. Document the discussion, including risks and benefits identified.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Communication	Treatment

 
2	For a woman who is a candidate for TOLAC, offer TOLAC and help her make an informed decision by fully discussing the risks and advantages while showing flexibility and understanding of her preferences and concerns.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centered Approach

 
3	In a woman who has had a Caesarean section and who goes into labour, be flexible in the management approach and adapt it to the circumstances, while still respecting the plans and preferences of the woman as much as possible (e.g., manage a spontaneous precipitous labour in a woman who had planned a repeat Caesarean section, discuss conversion of a planned TOLAC to a Caesarean section).

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centered Approach

 
4	Before planning or managing a TOLAC, ensure that the resources necessary for an unexpected immediate operative delivery are available and in place, ensure that the woman and her supports are well prepared for the complications that could necessitate this eventuality, and that all discussions and decisions about the TOLAC have been fully documented.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation

Communication	Treatment

 
5  For a woman choosing a TOLAC, provide appropriate maternal	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
and fetal surveillance, close monitoring of the progress of labour,		
and careful use of induction and uterotonics if indicated.		

 

6	When managing a TOLAC, carefully assess maternal and fetal well-being and recognize any signs of imminent or actual uterine rupture requiring maternal and fetal resuscitation and urgent conversion to Caesarean section if needed.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

 


















2020	209 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Induction of labour

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	When considering induction of labour, specifically assess the factors that will influence the decision (e.g., accurate expected date of delivery, indications, contraindications, cervical ripeness, maternal preference) and document the factors clearly to provide justification for decisions.

2	When planning induction of labour:

a)	Induce labour only when there is a compelling and convincing indication and no contraindication

b)	Prioritize and schedule the induction based on indication and resources
 


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Communication	Treatment







Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Selectivity	Treatment

 
c) Select the facility with appropriate resources to manage fetal  Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
and maternal needs	

 

3	When recommending induction of labour, obtain and document clear and detailed informed consent from the woman for accepting or declining the induction.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Communication

 

4  When inducing labour:			
a) Select the appropriate method of cervical ripening (e.g.,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
balloon catheters, prostaglandins) and/or induction (e.g.,			
			
prostaglandins, oxytocin), based on obstetrical and medical history,			
Bishop score, patient preference, and team considerations.			
			
b) Assess the effect of the induction on maternal and fetal well-	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
being.			

 

c)	Select women for whom the outpatient management of cervical ripening is appropriate.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

 
5	During induction of labour, look for and manage complications of	Clinical Reasoning	History
	induction (e.g., tachysystole, abnormal fetal surveillance).		Treatment
			
6	When a selected method of induction is unsuccessful, modify the	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	management plan accordingly.		
			

 












2020	210 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Peripartum mental health

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	Enquire about the mental health of all women throughout the	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	peripartum period, assessing to identify discrete signs or symptoms			
	or factors leading to a higher risk (e.g., substance abuse, intimate			
	partner violence, previous mental health disorder, history of sexual			
	abuse), and add an appropriate mood assessment tool (e.g.,			
	Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale, Generalized Anxiety			
	Disorder scale) when indicated.			
				
2	When concerns are raised about mental health in the peripartum	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	period, actively explore the situation with the woman and her		Treatment	
	supports, and provide education about normal and common			
	psychological changes during pregnancy, as well as the signs that			
	may suggest a mental health disorder.			
				
3	For women in the peripartum period with an apparent mental	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	health disorder, assess to rule out possible underlying causative or			
	contributing medical conditions (e.g., anemia, thyroid dysfunction).			
				
4	For a woman with a mental health disorder in the peripartum	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	period, determine the risk of harm to self, infant, or others. When		Treatment	
	this risk is present, ensure urgent management to reduce the risk of			
	harm. Educate the woman and her supports regarding a possible			
	rapid escalation of symptoms, and available resources.			
				
5	For a woman with a mental health disorder in the peripartum	Communication	Treatment	
	period:		Referral	
				

a)	Maintain the therapeutic relationship, provide counselling, refer to the available resources, and advocate for rapid access when needed

b) Use medication if indicated, balancing the risk of untreated   Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
mental health issues against the risk of medications to the fetus or	
newborn, and recognizing the benefits of continued breastfeeding if	
desired	
	

 
















2020	211 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Gestational hypertension/preeclampsia

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	At the beginning of all pregnancies, identify and assess the risk factors for gestational hypertension/preeclampsia and consider initiating preventive therapy for those at high risk.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

Treatment

 
2	Consider the diagnosis of preeclampsia at prenatal visits, even if the	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
	blood pressure is not obviously elevated, and especially when the		
	woman has new poorly-defined constitutional symptoms.		
			
3	When preeclampsia is suspected, look for confirmatory evidence	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	(symptoms, signs, basic investigations) to establish or rule out the		Treatment
	diagnosis. Classify according to current nomenclature and re-assess		
	regularly for progression of disorder.		
			
4	For gestational hypertension or non-severe preeclampsia, follow	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	closely and manage according to maternal and fetal well-being and		Follow-up
	gestational age.		
			
5	For a woman with a diagnosis of preeclampsia with adverse	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	conditions or severe preeclampsia, manage actively by:		

•	Initiating MgSO4 in a timely fashion and other medications as appropriate (e.g., anti-hypertensives)

•	Assessing the need for prompt delivery, and arranging for delivery and/or consultation when indicated


6  For any woman with gestational hypertension or preeclampsia who  Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up
has delivered, continue management and monitor for progression or	
complications throughout the postpartum period.	
	

 


























2020	212 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Gestational diabetes

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	In all pregnant women, screen for gestational diabetes using the	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	appropriate test at the appropriate gestational age, and interpret the		
	results according to guidelines for gestational diabetes (i.e., not		
	regular diabetic guidelines).		
			
2	For a woman with gestational diabetes, plan for blood glucose	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	control to avoid extremes of hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia, and		
do not confuse treatment targets and guidelines with those for non-gestational diabetes.

 

3  For a pregnant woman who is receiving specific care for diabetes	Clinical Reasoning
(gestational or pre-gestational) from other providers, maintain your	
planned antepartum care for the patient, and integrate the	
recommended diabetic care into the overall management plan.	

 


Treatment

Follow-up

 
4	When caring for a woman with gestational diabetes, closely monitor	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up	
	fetal growth and well-being (e.g., ultrasound, non-stress tests), as			
	well as the maternal status, in order to recognize indications for			
	induction.			
			
5  When providing intrapartum care to a woman with gestational			
	diabetes:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	a) Anticipate potential fetal macrosomia and if present,			
				
	anticipate and plan for labour dystocia and shoulder dystocia			
	b) Manage blood sugars actively, using insulin when indicated	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	for optimal care, continuing as necessary into the postpartum			
				
6	Following a gestational diabetic’s delivery:			
	a) Monitor the newborn closely for hypoglycemia, in the	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	immediate postpartum period			
				
	b) Plan to include screening for diabetes in the postpartum care	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up	
	of the woman			
				

 
















2020	213 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Breastfeeding

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	During prenatal care, enquire about newborn feeding plans. Promote exclusive breastfeeding, help establish reasonable expectations, and provide adequate information to develop a plan for feeding that respects the mother’s preferences and informed choice.

 


Clinical Reasoning	History

Patient-centered Approach	Treatment

 
2	For a woman who is not breastfeeding her newborn, provide support for her decision, and provide information about feeding with human milk substitute.

 

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centered Approach

 
3	For all pregnant women, assess and, when indicated, examine for	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
	issues that may affect breastfeeding (e.g., inverted nipples, previous		Treatment
	surgery), and suggest interventions and resources.		
			
4	For all births, including Caesarean section, facilitate early skin-to	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	skin contact and a comfortable and effective latch.		

 

5  When breastfeeding is challenging, first assess the latch and	Clinical Reasoning
determine whether it is effective, and then look for other barriers to	
successful breastfeeding (e.g., lack of support, postpartum	
depression, breast pain, tongue tie, prematurity).	

 


History

Physical exam

 
6	When any concerns or difficulties with breastfeeding arise,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	especially in the immediate newborn period, facilitate early access to		Referral
	suitable professional support.		
			
7	Facilitate the continuation of breastfeeding when conditions arise,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	such as:		

•	The woman has a breast infection or a nipple lesion

•	The woman or newborn requires medications, investigations, or hospitalization


8  When a newborn/infant is exclusively breastfed, educate the family  Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
regarding normal weight gain, stool and voiding patterns, and how	
to assess the adequacy of feeding.	
	

 













2020	214 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


First week of life


Key feature	Skill	Phase
1.	When caring for newborns:		
	a)	Look for and recognize the subtle signs that they may be unwell	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis
		(e.g., respiratory status, colour, tone, feeding), assess for etiology		
		(e.g., hypoglycemia, maternal drug effect, sepsis) and arrange for		
		diagnostic tests and ongoing care.		
	b)	Identify those who appear well but may be at a higher risk of	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation
		complications (e.g., infant of diabetic woman, intrapartum		
		infection, operative birth, drug withdrawal, social stressors), in		
		order to plan close observation and management.		
	c)	Perform a thorough physical examination (e.g., palate, pulses,	Clinical Reasoning	Physical exam
		heart sounds, hips, testes, anus) to detect congenital		
		abnormalities.		
2.	Prior to discharging any newborn, ensure the following:	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
o	Adequate feeding plan has been established
o	Newborn screening (e.g., bilirubin, metabolic, hearing test) has been completed or arranged
o	Family has been educated regarding care of the newborn (e.g., car

seat, infant sleeping, acceptable weight loss) respecting cultural differences
o	Follow-up has been planned with a health care professional

within a few days of discharge, especially for firstborns, families with psychosocial stressors, or if there were any perinatal issues
	3.  When the parents (or other caregivers, including health care	Selectivity	Diagnosis
	professionals) of a newborn express concern that the baby is unwell,		
	listen carefully, and fully assess the baby to detect any subtle		
	indicators of serious illness (e.g., sepsis).		

 

























2020	215 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care



Working in teams in intrapartum care

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	Acknowledge all team members (including the patient and her supports) and as well as their roles and contributions, and respectfully listen to and respond to others’ opinions, especially when they differ from your own.

 


Communication Treatment Professionalism

 
2	Promote collaboration by accepting and giving help where required,	Professionalism	Treatment
	contribute where most useful even when not in primary roles, and		
	follow the leadership of others or assume the leadership for a		
	defined period or situation.		
			
3	Respect the professional autonomy of the individual members of	Professionalism	Treatment
	the team, while promoting collaborative decisions and actions for		
	the benefit of the patient.		
			
4	When a team is working under difficult conditions, try to promote	Professionalism	Treatment
	and maintain the effectiveness of the team by remaining calm,	Clinical Reasoning	
	helping others in their roles and tasks whenever appropriate,		
	resolving differences actively by considering the best interests of the		
	patient, and by inspiring confidence whenever possible.		
			
5	Maintain clear verbal and written communications (including	Communication	Treatment
	documentation), confirm that the information has been received		
	(closed loop), and facilitate the participation of all in debriefing		
	sessions.		
			

 





























2020	216 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for Intrapartum and Perinatal Care


Limits—practising according to personal and facility limits

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	When a woman requires care that is beyond your personal or	Professionalism	Treatment	
	facility limits, advocate firmly to obtain this care in a timely fashion			
	from an appropriate resource.			
				
2	Whenever the clinical course of a woman is not going as expected,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	review the provisional diagnosis and management plan, consider			
	alternatives, and change if necessary (e.g., regularly reassess/re-			
	evaluate potentially unstable patients, reflect on your clinical			
	decisions).			
				
3	Whenever you recognize that a diagnosis or management plan			
	needs to be modified:	Clinical Reasoning	Referral	
	a) Seek additional information or help without delay.			
	b) Discuss the changes with the woman, her supports, and the	Communication	Treatment	
	team.	Clinical Reasoning		
	c) Document the changes and the discussion.	Communication	Treatment	
				
4	When caring for pregnant women, reflect on clinical experiences to	Professionalism	Diagnosis	
	identify gaps in clinical skills, and close those gaps with self- or		Treatment	
				
	group-learning.			
				
5	After an unexpected or unusual event, debrief effectively with	Communication	Follow-up	
	appropriate team members, including the woman and her supports.			
				

 





























2020	217 | P a g e
 


Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health


Out of the 24 priority topics developed by the Working Group on the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health, 16 overlapped with the existing topics for family medicine and were used to update their key features (see Part III).

The remaining topics are listed here as a resource.



1.	Bipolar disorder

2.	Comorbid illnesses in mental health context

3.	Developmental disability and delay

4.	Family and circle of support in mental health context

5.	Screening and early detection of mental health problems

6.	Teamwork in mental health

7.	Trauma informed care

8.	Using community mental health resources

































2010	218 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health



Bipolar disorder

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	In any patient with depression, consider the possibility of bipolar	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	disorder. Ask about family history, past symptoms and episodes.		Hypothesis generation	
				
2	Recognize that standard antidepressant treatment in a person with	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	possible bipolar disorder may trigger mania or rapid mood cycling.		Follow-up	
	Monitor closely.			
				
3	1When considering a diagnosis of bipolar disorder,			
	a) Assess fully for other diagnostic possibilities such as	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	substance use, post-traumatic stress disorder, situational duress or			
	personality disorder		Hypothesis generation	
				
	b) Avoid applying the diagnostic label too early, especially in	Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis	
	younger patients			
	c) Consider consultation if the diagnosis is uncertain	Clinical Reasoning	Referral	
		Communication		
				
4	When caring for a patient with bipolar disorder,	Professionalism	Follow-up	
	a) Maintain a strong therapeutic relationship in order to			
	negotiate adequate treatment during episodes of increasing	Patient-centred Approach		
symptoms
 

b)	Look for and recognize the indicators of impending crisis and need for intervention, including involuntary treatment when appropriate
 


Clinical Reasoning	History

Selectivity	Treatment

 
c)	Negotiate and plan proactive care for relapse and recovery which may include involvement of others

d)	Monitor response to and side effects of medication

e)	Monitor and manage self medicating with alcohol or substances
 

Communication	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Follow-up

Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up

 

See also: Depression
 
















2020	219 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health


Comorbid illnesses in mental health context

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	At every medical encounter inquire about both the patient’s	Patient-centred Approach	History	
	physical and mental health in order to provide proactive ‘whole			
	person’ care.			
			
2  When caring for a patient with mental health/alcohol or substance			
	use problems consider medical co-morbidities and,	Clinical Reasoning	Follow-up	
	a) Monitor the impact of the treatment on the person’s overall			
	health (e.g. medications for schizophrenia causing increased cardio-			
	vascular risk).			
	b) Ensure their access to preventive care and medical services	Professionalism	Treatment	
		Patient-centred Approach	Referral	
	c) Pay attention to the effects of stress and adversity on cardio-	Patient-centred Approach	Hypothesis generation	
	metabolic risk		Follow-up	
	d) Assess the impact of acute and chronic pain	Patient Centre	History	
	e) Identify specific risk factors for illness (e.g. smoking, obesity,	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	sleep apnea)			
				
3	When a comorbid illness is diagnosed in a patient with mental			
	health/alcohol or substance use problems:	Communication	Diagnosis	
	a   ) Clearly communicate the diagnosis, treatment plan and			
	relevant information. Answer questions and involve the patient in	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
				
their care.
 

b)	Recognize that they have the same interest in their medical problems as any other patient, but more time and support may be required to understand and process information
 


Professionalism Diagnosis Patient-centred Approach

 
c) Facilitate access to care and effectively coordinate treatment	Professionalism	Treatment	
with other available services in order to mitigate system barriers and	Communication	Referral	
stigma			
d) Monitor progress, maintain the therapeutic alliance and	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
clarify your own role in their ongoing care	Professionalism		
			
			
When caring for patients with a chronic illness routinely inquire	Clinical Reasoning	History	
about the impact of medical problems on their life, family, mood	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
and anxiety level. Recognize that depressed mood and anxiety can			
be a consequence of medical problems.			
			

 









2020	220 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health


Developmental disability and delay

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase
			
1	When caring for children, regularly and systematically assess	Clinical Reasoning	History
	physical and neuropsychological development, to facilitate the early		Physical
	detection and management of developmental problems.		
			
2	When parents are concerned about a child’s development even after	Clinical Reasoning	History
	an assessment with no evidence of developmental delay, plan regular	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up
	reviews to:		

•	assess the child’s development over time

•	pay special attention to the child’s mental health

•	explore the impact on the family


3  For a child whose development shows variation from expectations,	Clinical Reasoning	History	
regularly reassess their physical and mental health. Look for			
possible causes with a particular emphasis on those that may be	Selectivity	Hypothesis generation	
reversible or treatable.			

 

4	When concerns are raised about a child’s development or behaviour, with parental consent, seek information from all those caring for the child (e.g. parents, daycare, school).

 


Clinical Reasoning	History

Communication

 
5	When a developmental problem is suspected, or identified in a	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment
	child, develop a management plan with the parents that includes	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up
	appropriate:		
	• use of community support services		
	• consultation services or specialized treatment		
	• follow-up to monitor progress and ongoing or new		
	concerns		
	• attention to puberty and adolescent transition		
			
6	When providing care for an adult with developmental disability,	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment
	establish a means of communication that facilitates:	Communication	Follow-up

•	building a trusting relationship

•	assessment of behaviour changes

•	assessment of physical and mental health

•	personal care planning over the long term

 
















2020	221 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health


Family and circle of support in mental health context

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	When providing care to a patient with mental health and addiction	Patient-centred Approach	History	
	problems seek to understand who is “family” and/or the patient’s			
	“circle of support”.			
				
2	When a patient decides to exclude family from the circle of support,	Patient-centred Approach	History	
	ascertain the reasons and address when appropriate.			
				
3	When considering communication with the family or circle of	Communication	History	
	support, obtain the consent of the patient or mandated substitute,	Professionalism	Treatment	
	respecting their rights to privacy and confidentiality.			
				
4	When providing care to a patient with mental health and alcohol	Patient-centred Approach	History	
	and substance use problems:			
	a) assess the impact of the patient’s illness on the family,			
	b) assess the impact of the family on the patient’s illness	Patient-centred Approach	History	
	c) assess the capacity of the family to contribute to the care, and	Patient-centred Approach	History	
	the family’s need for support	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
	d) review the situation regularly	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
		Clinical Reasoning		
				
5	When working with a family for the ongoing care and recovery of a			
	patient,	Selectivity	Treatment	
	a) Set clear goals for meetings with family and remain flexible in			
	order to gather unplanned or unexpected information	Patient-centred Approach		
				
	b) Find a balance between collective and individual	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	interventions and decisions	Professionalism		
	c) Recognize family relationships are complex and members	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	may respond differently	Communication		
				
6	Identify needs for specific intervention or support for the family	Professionalism	History	
		Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
members of a patient. If appropriate, provide or arrange for this intervention in a timely fashion, while paying attention to privacy, boundary, and ethical issues.

 

7	When family therapy is indicated, determine the optimal resource according to the goals of therapy, the level of expertise required, the resources available, boundary issues, and family preferences.

 


Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach	Referral

 
8	When concerns about a patient or a family member are raised by proxy, develop a management plan only after a full assessment of the situation, including:
•	the presence of safety issues, particularly for children and other vulnerable people
•	the family situation from the proxy’s and the patient’s point of view,
•	the presence of mental health problems, alcohol or

 


Clinical Reasoning	History

Professionalism	Treatment

 
2020	222 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health



substance use and other health issues

•	the availability of appropriate community or referral

resources

•	ethical considerations and individual rights


9  When providing care for more than one family member, be alert to  Professionalism	Treatment
conflicting objectives and confidentiality issues. Consult a colleague,	
refer a patient or transfer care as needed.	
	

 





















































2020	223 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health


Screening and early detection of mental health problems

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	When patients present for care, either during periodic health			
	examinations or opportunistically,	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	a) Assess mental health and alcohol and substance use, as these			
	issues are prevalent and often undetected			
	b) Identify patients who may be at higher risk of mental health	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	issues			
	c) Screen those patients systematically, using validated tools as	Clinical Reasoning	Investigation	
	necessary			
				
2	In a patient presenting with new or ill-defined symptoms or a	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	change in behaviour or level of functioning, assess mental health,			
	and alcohol and substance use.			
				
3	For patients with a history of mental health problems or disordered	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	alcohol or substance use, look for relapse or reoccurrence, as these			
	are chronic diseases.			
				
4	For all patients with mental health or alcohol or substance use	Communication	Treatment	
	concerns, use an empathetic and non-judgemental approach to			
	facilitate open communication.	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
				
5	When following patients with mental health, and alcohol and	Clinical Reasoning	History	
	substance use problems, ensure appropriate screening for physical			
	problems or illness.		Hypothesis generation	
				
				

 




























2020	224 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health


Teamwork in mental health

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	When a team approach to care of a person with mental health or alcohol and substance use concerns is needed,
a)	Establish patient centred goals of care

b)	Include the patient and /or the family in the creation and activities of the team
 



Clinical Reasoning	Treatment

Patient-centred Approach

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

 
c) Facilitate team membership and roles as situations evolve	Professionalism	Follow-up	
	Communication		
			
2  When sharing care of a person with mental health, alcohol or	Professionalism	Treatment	
substance use concerns,			
a) Encourage a coordinated approach to management	Communication		
b) Understand the roles and responsibilities of the team	Professionalism	Referral	
members			
c) Establish clear and ethical communication	Communication	Treatment	
	Professionalism		

 
d)	Ensure that the patient understands and agrees with these arrangements, including their own responsibilities

 

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

Communication

 
3  Anticipate the effect a team approach may have on your therapeutic	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
alliance, and work with the patient to maintain the alliance in an	Professionalism		
appropriately modified fashion.			
			
4  When working within a team,	Professionalism	Follow-up	
a) Facilitate the contributions of others			
	Communication		
b) Use an open and respectful communication style	Communication	Treatment	
c) Pay attention to careful and accurate record keeping	Communication	Follow-up	
		Treatment	
d) Support recovery focused care planning	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
			

 



















2020	225 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health


Trauma informed care

	Key Feature	Skill	Phase	
				
1	In all patients, with or without mental health, alcohol or substance			
	use issues,	Clinical Reasoning	Hypothesis generation	
	a) Consider the possibility of undisclosed trauma			
				
	b) Inquire in an empathic manner about experiences across the	Communication	History	
	lifespan that may have been traumatic			
				
2	For a patient with issues related to trauma, take the time to develop	Patient-centred Approach	Treatment	
	a trusting therapeutic relationship that will provide a safe space for			
	disclosure.	Communication	Follow-up	
				
3	For patients with a known history of trauma, adapt routine clinical	Patient-centred Approach	Follow-up	
	encounters to avoid re-traumatizing the patient.			

 

4	For patients with a history of trauma, reinforce their sense of autonomy and control by developing, in partnership with the patient, coping strategies and a management plan that utilize their strengths and capacities.

 


Treatment

Patient-centred Approach

Communication

 
5	For a patient who is at risk for ongoing trauma, support the patient to develop and implement a safety plan to reduce risk.

 

Treatment

Clinical Reasoning

Patient-centred Approach

 
6  When caring for a patient with issues related to trauma, recognize	Professionalism	Treatment
and address your own emotional responses.		
		

 






























2020	226 | P a g e
 
Priority Topics and Key Features for the Assessment of Competence in Mental Health



Using community mental health resources

Key Feature	Skill	Phase

 

1	When caring for a patient with mental health and/or alcohol or substance use problems:

a)	Identify your community resources and referral pathways

b)	Identify those patients who could benefit from the community resources and services
 



Professionalism	Treatment

Clinical Reasoning	Diagnosis

 
c)	Match the patient’s preferences, abilities and needs to the appropriate and available resource
 

Patient-centred Approach	Treatment

 
d) Advocate to address service gaps	Professionalism	Treatment	
e) Consider a full range of possible resources (e.g. recreational,	Clinical Reasoning	Treatment	
occupational, spiritual etc.)	Patient-centred Approach		
			
2  When referring to one or more community resources,	Patient-centred Approach	Referral	
a) Review with patient what they can expect			
b) Facilitate access to the resources by providing necessary	Communication	Referral	
information and documentation	Professionalism		
c) Communicate directly with the resources when appropriate	Communication	Follow-up	
	Professionalism		
			
3  When a patient has been referred to or is being cared for by other	Professionalism	Follow-up	
community resources, follow up to maintain your ongoing			
therapeutic relationship. Ensure that the expected care is being			
provided.			

 



























2020	227 | P a g e
 
Core Procedures



Integumentary Procedures

Abscess incision and drainage

Wound debridement

Insertion of sutures; simple, mattress, and subcuticular

Laceration repair; suture and gluing Skin biopsy; shave, punch, and excisional Excision of dermal lesions, e.g., papilloma, nevus, or cyst

Cryotherapy of skin lesions

Electrocautery of skin lesions

Skin scraping for fungus determination Use of Wood’s lamp

Release subungual hematoma

Drainage acute paronychia

Partial toenail removal

Wedge excision for ingrown toenail

Removal of foreign body, e.g., fish hook, splinter, or glass

Pare skin callus

Local Anesthetic Procedures

Infiltration of local anesthetic

Digital block in finger or toe

Eye Procedures

Instillation of fluorescein

Slit lamp examination

Removal of corneal or conjunctival foreign body Application of eye patch

Ear Procedures

Removal of cerumen

Removal of foreign body

Nose Procedures

Removal of foreign body

Cautery for anterior epistaxis

Anterior nasal packing

Gastrointestinal Procedures

Nasogastric tube insertion

Fecal occult blood testing

Anoscopy/proctoscopy

Incise and drain thrombosed external hemorrhoid



2010
 





Genitourinary and Women’s Health Procedures

Placement of transurethral catheter

Cryotherapy or chemical therapy genital warts

Aspirate breast cyst

Pap smear

Diaphragm fitting and insertion

Insertion of intrauterine device

Endometrial aspiration biopsy

Obstetrical Procedures

Normal vaginal delivery Episiotomy and repair Artificial rupture of membranes

Musculoskeletal Procedures

Splinting of injured extremities

Application of sling—upper extremity

Reduction of dislocated finger

Reduce dislocated radial head (pulled elbow)

Reduce dislocated shoulder Application of forearm cast Application of ulnar gutter splint Application of scaphoid cast Application of below-knee cast Aspiration and injection, knee joint Aspiration and injection, shoulder joint Injection of lateral epicondyle (tennis elbow) Aspiration and injection of bursae, e.g., patellar, subacromial


Resuscitation Procedures

Oral airway insertion

Bag-and-mask ventilation

Endotracheal intubation

Cardiac defibrillation

Injections and Cannulations

Intramuscular injection

Subcutaneous injection

Intradermal injection

Venipuncture

Peripheral intravenous line; adult and child

Peripheral venous access—infant

Adult lumbar puncture





228 | P a g e
 

